Yeah, so starting the recording would have been clever. Okay, great. So, welcome back to the lecture course. We're currently talking about search trees, and the last thing we did is we analyzed red-black trees. So, just to remind you what a red-black tree is, a red-black tree is a special kind of search tree where, and what is a search tree? A search tree is a tree where, for each node, all the nodes that are in the left subtree of the node are smaller equal in the key than the node itself, and all elements, all nodes that are in the right subtree of a node have a larger key than the node itself. We've already seen that we can do several operations on search trees, like finding the successor, finding the predecessor, finding the maximum and the minimum, and all of these operations work in order of log n, when n is the size of the tree. Then we've introduced to the operations insert and delete and search. All of them are standard somehow on a binary tree, on a binary search tree, and we've seen that all of them operate in order of the height of the tree. Right? And so, of course, since we know that the minimal height of a tree of size n, of a binary tree of size n, is approximately order of logarithm of n, we wanted to find trees, search trees, that are always in the order of the logarithm of n in height. And so, we started to discuss red-black trees, and red-black trees are special binary search trees, where every node, there are five properties. Every node is either red or black, the first property. The second property is that the root is black. Then the third one is that all the children of the leaves, which we call the nil leaves, that all the nils are black. The fourth property is that every red node has two black children, so we cannot have two red nodes on any path going from the root to the leaves. And exactly this is the other property, property five, that every path that goes from the root to any leaf has the same number of black nodes on it. Those are the five properties of red-black trees, and the last thing we did is we analyzed how to insert a node into such a tree properly. And the idea is we just used the insert operation of normally binary search trees, which were to follow find that leaf, where we actually want to insert the, or not really leave, find that node where we want to insert the new node as a leaf, either as a right or as a left child. And then we color the node red. And we've seen that all the properties of red-black trees are satisfied, except for in the insert operation, we can have two possibilities. The first one is that the root cannot be black, which is if we just inserted the first node into a tree, and then we just recolor it black, and we're finished. The second thing is that we might violate the two red in succession rule. So we cannot have two reds in succession. It's going to, of course, happen, because if we insert the new node as a child of a red node, then, of course, we have two red nodes in succession. And then we have to repair it. And to repair it, we have two basic, or actually three basic operations. The first one is recoloring, so we can change the color of nodes, and then we can rotate trees, either to the left or to the right, which means we take three nodes, and turn them around, keep the left and the right subtrees as they are, the left subtrees of the left node and the right subtrees of the right node as they are, but we switch the middle one from the one node to the other, depending on whether we wrote it left or right. And using only these three operations, we have produced an algorithm that actually fixes the red-black tree after an insert. And so the only remaining algorithm that we still need to discuss and for which we still need to find a way to do it in order of log-n steps is deleting a node, and this will be the final thing that we learn about red-black trees and actually about binary search trees. So, how do we delete a node? If we remember, for binary search trees, the delete operation itself was already quite complicated. Right? So, there was the most complicated operation for binary search trees already. Why? What did we do? Well, we, of course, looked into a graph where the node is that we wanted to delete. And now, what, of course, happens now is we need to figure out what we can do. Why? Because if we only have one child, then this is not an issue because then we can just remove ourselves and just put our child to where we were. This was the simple operation. Difficult operation was what happens if we have two children because we cannot plug two children into the same point where we were. Right? Because we only have one parent, but we have two children. We cannot put both of our children to our one parent. And so, we needed to figure out how to do that. And what was the idea? The idea was we take the node and we look for its successor. Right? So, this was the idea. The successor of the node should be the replacement because this is the next larger node. Right? So, the first thing we did is we looked for the successor of the node. Well, it's known that the successor usually is in the right subtree. We do know that we have a right subtree because otherwise we wouldn't have two children. And so, our successor will be in our right subtree because these are the next nodes that are bigger than ourselves. And what else do we know about our successor? we know that our successor doesn't have a left subtree because the left subtree would contain all nodes that are smaller than our successor but we are the next smaller node so we can and we are not in the subtree because we're an ancestor. So, therefore, if we look for our successor we will have a node that has only one child. Right? It's always a right child never a left child and so what we do next is we replace the node where we are with our successor. Right? So, this is the first thing and then we have to do something with the children. Right? So, what we do is we take the right subtree of our successor and put it where our successor was because this doesn't break anything. And then our successor has two open children slots. Right? Because their children are somewhere else and then the two children are open for our two children where we want to be deleted. Right? This is the idea. So, we wrote that node up and we put our children to the successor and the subtree of the successor to where the successor was. Right? So, this is the same operation we will also do in red-black trees. Okay? Okay, great. Now, the first algorithm that we have to talk about is the one important algorithm we also had to do in the delete operation which means basically that we take whole subtrees and put them somewhere else and this operation is called transplanting. Well, transplanting, that's what you do with trees. You transplant them, remove from one point and put them to the other. So, what is transplanting? Do it takes the subtree that starts at V and puts it to where U was. So, put it as a subtree of U. Okay? So, how does it work? Well, just let's look at it again. If the parent of where we put it is nil, that means we have to put it at the root of the tree and, well, then we are at the new root of the tree. Otherwise, if we are, if U is a left child, of its parent, then, of course, V is now the new left child of U's parent. Otherwise, U is a right child of its parent, and then V will be the new right child of its parent, right? Because we just plant the subtree of V there. And then, of course, the parent of V will be the old parent of U. So, we discard everything that was at U, and we just put V as a new parent there. So, this is something we already know from transplanting in ordinary search trees. The only difference is, in ordinary search trees, we had more nils flying around. So, we always had to check whether the children were nil or something like that. This is no longer necessary here, because we have this nice sentinel nil, which is T. dot nil, and this absorbs all changes that we couldn't do for real nils, because we can also, if parents or children or something are nil, then we can just assign things to nil, because this is a real node. Okay? So, this is why this transplant operation looks a bit more simple than the transplant operation we had before. Okay, so this was the start. Now, now that we know that we can do transplanting, we need to think about what deletion actually does, and this is the first part of delete. Okay, this is the operation we're gonna discuss now, first. Okay, so, I need to switch off the lights of the I don't forget to switch off the lights, so how does this work? Yes, I remember. Okay, so, it looks a bit complicated, but you haven't seen anything yet. So, this is the basic delete operation, and the most complicated thing, like in the insert operation comes in the last line of the code. But we need to discuss the other things first. So, the other things basically are more or less like the ordinary delete of a binary search tree. Let's run through it to figure out whether this is correct. well, just ignore for the moment that we have things like original color and other things. Let's just look at what we want to delete. So, we want to delete node Z. Okay, so, what are we doing? We are first checking, like in the delete operation of binary search trees, whether Z has only one child. Right? So, that's the first two ifs. The first if asks whether the left child of Z is nil, which means that Z only has a right child, or at most a right child. So, if the left child of Z is nil, then what we know is we can transplant its right subtree to itself, which means that just remove the node and put the right child to the point where we were, which basically is exactly what we wanted to do. Right? Okay. Then, we have the other if. The other if asks whether our right child is nil, so we only have a left child. We only have a left child. We just remove the node and put the left child there, and we still have a tree. Okay. Great. Which is exactly what we're doing. And then, we have the other. The other is that we have two children. children. Okay. So, if we have two children, then we have to do something. So, what do we have to do? We have to find the minimum of the right subtree. Why? Because we know that this is the successor. So, we need to find our successor, and we've already discussed. It's in our right subtree, because those are the elements that are bigger but they are smaller than all our right children of our ancestors, and we have to find the smallest element in our right subtree, which is the next element in the whole ordering. We've discussed this once again, once already, when deleting. Okay. So, this is the first thing we do. So, we find the minimum of our right subtree. And then, there's two possibilities. Either we are a direct child, we're just the next node, right? Or we are not. Those are the two possibilities. So, either the minimum is just the next node, or the minimum is further down in the tree. And already then, we had two possibilities. So, if the minimum is the next node, then we can skip the stuff in between, which is transplanting further, because then we don't have to transplant anything, because this is already there. Okay. Otherwise, if the Y is further down the tree, we're doing what we said before. We're taking the only child, which is the right child, of that node, and put it where the node was, which is the first transplant operation, right? So, we're replacing the node by its right child. And then, we're doing what we always do, we replace the node that we want to delete by its successor. It's putting Y there, which is the next one, transplant T said Y. And then, the remaining thing we have to do is we put the left child of the new node to be the left child of the old node. So, we don't want to lose the left subtree of our node set. We have to put it somewhere. This was the reason for all of this fuss. And since Y didn't have a left child, that's why we looked for the successor, we can put the left subtree of the original node as the left subtree of the new node Y. So, this is when we ignore all the coloring and all the axes in between. Okay? So, this is the ordinary delete a node from a binary search tree operation. Now, we need to figure out what to do with the colors. Okay? Right. So, what do we have to keep? We have to keep all the five properties. Now, the idea is the following. If we give Y, so, now we call the two nodes Y. So, Z is the node that we want to remove, and Y is the node that is the node that replaces Z, right? Which is a successor, more or less. In order to keep all the properties, at least in the subgraph, where Z sits, so the node that we want to remove, if we want to make sure that all the black, red, and things, so properties stay correct, one idea is just to give the new node the same color as the old node had. Right? So, because if the new node has the same color as the old node, nothing changes. And this is what the almost last line is doing. So, line 20 is just give the color of the new node the color of the old node. This is line 20, almost down the end. Okay, but what do we need to understand is we need to figure, we need to keep in mind at least what the color of the node was before that. Why? Because this is the color that we removed from where Y was. from where Y was before. Right? So, this is something we have to remember. Okay, so, and this is all about these X's and these Y's. Okay, so, now let's look at the X's and the Y's and let's go down the whole operation of red, black, delete from the top to the bottom again. Okay, so, the first thing we remember is the node that we removed, right, is set and we keep the original color, we keep the original color of the node that we removed and this is Y original color, that's where we store what the original color of the node that we removed was. And, as you can see in the first two L-ifs, the node that we actually only, the only node that we remove is Z, right? There. And the node that is now the new child is X. So, X is the second variable that keeps the node that is the child that replaced the node that we remove. Okay, so this is the idea of the two variables. So, Y is the node that we removed actually from the graph and X is the child of the node that we removed from the graph. The only child. Okay? So, why does this make sense? We have, let's go back again and discuss again the delete operation of a binary search tree with that in mind. Okay? So, the first thing, if we have only one child, left or right, what we actually do is we really remove the node Z and point its subtree to where we are. Right? if, on the other hand, we had two children in the search tree, then we didn't really remove the node itself. What we did is we replaced the node itself with a new node that had a new key but the same color. So, we didn't change colors. Where we really removed the node was we removed the successor node. from the tree and there we put a child. Right? So, the node that was really removed is if we only have one child was the node that we originally wanted to remove. Color-wise,! Right? So, it's, of course, we keep the node in the tree. But the color of the node that we really removed. This is the only thing that matters in the red black tree now. Okay? So, if we have only one child, then we remove the node, the color of the node, where we really wanted to remove originally. If we had two children, if the node had two children, we didn't do that. We put the new node there, but kept the sub trees. but we removed the node down in the tree and replaced it by its right child. And there, we removed the color from the tree. Right? The color of that original node. So, this is what we remember here. So, what do we remember? We remember the color of the node that we removed, which is Y original color, and we remembered the child of that node, that replaces the color that we removed, which is X. Right? Let's go through that again. So, we see that if Z has only left child, the right child of Z is the child of the new node where we change the color. Right? And the original color is the color of the node itself, which is why in the first two lines we assign Z to Y and the color of Z as the original color. If we only have a left child, then the left child is the node that we need to figure out and the color is still the node. Otherwise, the node that was really removed was the successor of Z. Its color, we have to remember, then its right subtree was the one that had a parent's color changed or so to speak. And that's it because we changed the color of the successor in line 20 to the color of the original node that we removed. Okay? So, after all of these ifs in line 21, we know two things. which are still important for our red-black properties. The first thing is we know the original color of the node that we really removed from the tree, right? Which is Y original color. This is a color that we actually removed. And the second thing we know is X. And X is the node that is now at the place where the node was whose color we removed. Okay? So, these are the two things. Everything everywhere else in the tree, colors didn't change. Okay? Because all the other nodes we didn't touch. The node of Z, when we replaced Z by Y, we changed the color of Y back to the color of Z. So, there the colors also didn't change. So, the only colors that changed was we removed the color of Y from the tree, which we remembered, so we know which color we removed, and we know where the tree continues from there, which is X. So, X is where the tree continues, and Y, original color, was the color that we removed. Okay? Is this clear somewhat? what? Okay, great. Because this was the first important step to understanding delete. Okay, great. Now, let's discuss what that means. I will leave this on, but still turn on the light, which means that I have to type this twice. Okay, great. So, now, let's discuss two possibilities. The first possibility is the color that we removed was red, and the second one is the color that we removed was black. Okay? So, and which of the things can now be violated, right? So, we have five possible things. Let's write them down again. So, the first one is, well, you can, but you don't have to. So, the first one is every node is black or right. Every node, is black or red. This is first. The second one is, the root is black. The third node is, nil is black. The fourth node is, red nodes have black have black children. And the fifth node is the every path from any node to a leaf has the same number. The of black nodes. I will call this the black height property. because this was the property. This is just shorter. Either I say five or I say the black height property. It's just shorter than saying all of this sentence. Okay, now, let's think about what happens with all of these properties if we have a red node. if we remove the red node. So, let's assume that why original color is red. If why original color is red, it doesn't change the first thing because we just removed something. every node is still red or black, even if we remove one. The second one is the root is black. If we just remove the red node, it was not the root node. So, we didn't remove the root node, the root is still black. We never remove nil, so nil stays black. And nil was black, so we didn't remove it because we are red. Well, red nodes of black children, well, we just removed the red node, so nothing happens. five also doesn't change because if we pass through the node, it was red anyway, so it wasn't counted. So it didn't change the number of black nodes, so it also doesn't change the number of black nodes on any path. So we just removed the red node, it doesn't matter. Which means that if our original color was red, nothing changed, then all of the red black tree properties are still kept. And that's why in line 21 it says if it is black we do something. Because if it is red we don't have to do something because nothing has changed. Okay, great. So that means if by chance we remove the red node, we just removed it and we are fine now. Okay, now the other thing is what happens if we remove the black node? Well, apparently something has to happen because this is the only other possibility. Okay, so what happens if we remove a black node? Well, what can go wrong? Well, one can't go wrong because every node is still red or black. And, well, two can go wrong, right? Because if it just removed the black node, it could have been the root node. But if it was the root node, well, then, of course, what could happen is that one of its children that went there might have been red, but the only thing that could happen is that it was the only child. Right? red, but then if it was the only child, it could be that the only child was red and root is indeed now red, which is bad. So, two can be violated. Okay? Well, we didn't do anything with nil, so the third can never be violated. Well, the next thing is red nodes only have black children. Well, if the parent of the node everywhere, right, of the node which we removed is red and the child that we had was also red, then we can, of course, have two red children in succession. So, four can definitely be violated. And the fifth one, we just removed the black node. So, by removing a black node, all the paths that go to that black node actually have one black node less, meaning that also five might be violated. Actually, five will always be violated unless we remove the last node of the tree. So, this will always fail, this might, and this might as well. So, that's why red, black, tree, delete, fix up is a bit more complicated than red, black, insert, fix up, because in insert, fix up, only two things could be violated, never this one. Okay, so, in order to make it a bit more simple for our repair operations, we will change the idea a bit. Okay? So, which of these five properties is the property of a red, black tree that is the most annoying to check? What do you think? The fifth, right? The fifth is a strange property. It says that you have to start from any node, and from any node, you have to go down every path to every leaf and count the number of black nodes. So, this is a nightmare in a tree to check, right? This is an exponential effort. You have a lot of possible paths. So, you definitely do not want to have the fifth property violated because you don't want to check it. But unfortunately, delete of a black node does violate the fifth thing. So, you have to repair it as simply as possible. So, three will never be violated. Checking two is trivial because that's only one node to check. And so, we only have two other things to play with, which is one, which is usually always trivially satisfied, and four. Okay, so, we do know how to do something with four because we've already learned with red black insert how to solve problems where we have two red nodes in a row. right? So, this is something like going through the tree, doing a lot of rotations, or actually not too many rotations, and finally solving that problem by doing rotations. property four is not an issue, really, so we know how to solve that. Property two is also not an issue because if we end up with a red node at root, we just color it black and we're finished. Because that changes only, that adds only one thing to every, one hop, one black hop to every path which doesn't matter. So, solving two is trivial, we know how to do with four, so we have to keep five somehow and maybe do something else. And the idea is we replace violating five with violating one. so we introduce new colors. Okay? So the new color we introduce is red black and black black. Okay? So, what is red black? Red black is a node that is red, but whenever you traverse it, counts as black. So for every path you pass through the node, it counts as an additional black. But in the tree, it is red. So this is a red-black node. A black-black node is a node that counts for two blacks if you pass it. Okay? So it is black and it is, in addition, one black more. Right? And so the idea to repair property five when we removed a black node from the tree is the only child that replaces it will be colored black-black. Because then the two hops that we usually take, which are both black, will be two. and so the property five will still be satisfied. Because we just add, instead of one, we add two, which is the removed node is the first black and the node itself is the second black. And if we replaced the node with a red node, then we just color the node red-black, which still keeps the black of the removed node. And then we've repaired five. Because the count is still true. But of course, we violate one now because one has every node is either red or black and never says that a node can be red-black or black-black. And so we have new node colors. You can also call them green and blue if you like, but red-black and black-black is more intuitive for what we're going to do. And so we have now violated possibly one, two, and four. But no longer five. And the important thing is we always keep it like that. We never ever want to violate five because this is something we cannot easily repair because it means going through all the paths in the tree, which is a nightmare because it's a lot of effort. Okay, so now we have to figure out how to repair these things. So after this, line 21, red-black delete fix-up, we have two things. we have violations of possibly two and four, and we have one node, and this is the next thing, important thing in the tree, there will be always only a single node that does not have color, either red or black. Right? And this node is X. So X is the node that doesn't have the proper color. It is either black-black or red-black depending on what X was before. And we don't really enter into the tree, the new color, but we just know that the color where X points at is the node that has this strange double color. Okay? So now let's go to red-black fix-up and check what this does. Okay, and I have to get this thing smaller for the moment so that you can see it in all of its beauty. I will make it bigger again because I know it's too small to really see it. I will have to turn down the lights again. But as you can see, if you think back about insert fix-up, right? Red-black insert fix-up. Red-black insert fix-up also had a large if and then two and then three cases in every if. And this is because binary search trees are left-right symmetric. So depending on whether we are in the left or in the right subtree, the two operations look completely mirror images of each other. So every left operation becomes a right operation, every left rotate becomes a right rotate and the other way around. So we only have to think about one half of the problem and not both. The other half is just taking the same algorithm and replacing every left by right and every right by left and we're finished. So and that's why I don't have to show you the whole algorithm but only half of it and so on. Now let's make it bigger again and let's look at the top half of the algorithm meaning we have here the if x is left subchild else x is a right subchild and this is just the mirror image. And so we're making the first half large so that it becomes readable again and we only discuss the case when x is a left child of its parent. So what is x again? x is the node that has this strange double color. The first color is the color that is stored in x and the second color is a virtual black that we just know because we know that it is x we're looking at. So this x node has always this double color number. Okay now so if x is a left child then what we remember what we need to look at now is not its uncle like in the insert operation but its sibling. So the other child of its parent. And of course the other child of its parent can either be red or it can be black. And we have one case, case one is the sibling is red and the other cases is the sibling is black. And if the sibling is black then either both children are black or only one of the children is black. And those are the four cases. And the idea of case one is that we perform an operation that reduces case one to any of the other three cases. So case one is repaired by changing the tree in such a way that after case one case two, three, or four happens always. So this is the first thing. We will look at pictures soon just to get you an idea. And then again as before, case three is again something like that. So we take case three and repair it so that after repairing case three we will have case four. And then we learn how to repair case two and case four. So this is basically the idea. here. So let's look at images of the trees that are the various cases. Those are here. And I need to get a tiny, tiny bit smaller. Let's do it 180. That should be exactly right. Okay, so those are the four cases. Now, what is case one? As we said, case one is the case where the sibling of X. So you can see the X. The X is always at the A. Right? So the A node, always the leftmost node in the left tree is the X, where we look at. So whenever we have an X there, and I had wished it had an additional black ring around it. So whenever we had an X there, this is the double black node. So X is the double black node, and the other nodes are just single, and the sibling of X is red. So what we want to do is we want to change the tree in such a way that afterwards, the sibling of X is black. Okay? So this is the idea. We want to reduce the case where the sibling of X is red to the case where the sibling of X is black, without changing any other things. X is okay, so how do we do that? Well, basically, we rotate the nodes B, D, and C to the left. Right? So rotating the nodes B, D, and C to the left means that the D is moving to where the B was, so it's moving up. The B stays there. Instead of being the parent of D, it becomes the left child of D, and the left child of D goes to be the right child of B, and the left child of B is still X, and the right child of D is still E, so this is a normal rotation to the left, but what else? we change the colors of B and D, so we switch the colors of B and D, so we colored B red and colored D black, and now let's count whether any of these things, whether five has changed, because this is the only thing, we always have to make sure that when we count all the paths that the number of blacks on the path stay as they were, and so we coming from the going to alpha, then we passing B and we passing X, and X is double black, don't forget that, so this is a one for the B and a two for the X means that alpha has a three, right, and beta has a three as well, because it's going to, so gamma has a two, because it's going to B and it's going to C, and D is red, right, so gamma has a two, delta has a two, epsilon has a two, because it's going to B and E, and zeta has a two, because it's also going through B and E, so we know that alpha and beta have a three, and gamma delta epsilon and zeta have a two. Now let's check in the right subtree whether this hasn't changed, okay, so in the X, which is still a three, right, because X is still double black, we haven't changed it, so we're going to D and to X, which is a three for alpha and a three for beta, we're going to D, B, and C to go to gamma, but B is red, so this is still a two going through gamma, going through two delta is also two, and going through the numbers, right, so alpha, beta is still three, and gamma, delta, epsilon, and zeta are still two, and so we haven't changed property five at all. It might still be violated, but at least we didn't change the counts, right, and we haven't done anything bad with black and red nodes or anything else, so everything stood as it was, but now the sibling of X is no longer case one by rotation to any of the other cases which are the ones below, right, so case two, three, and four both have black siblings, okay, great, now let's look at the three cases of the black siblings, and now the important things are the children of the sibling, so we have three possibilities, right, the first possibility is that both children are black, that the left child is red, or that the right child is red, of the sibling, right, because now we know the node itself is double black, the sibling is black, and now we have to figure out what its children are, whether both children are black, whether the left child is black, or whether the right child is black, and that's it, okay, okay, okay, great, now, and if a node has this strange intermediate color, that means never mind, whatever the color is, whether it's red or black, doesn't matter, right, so that we don't have to draw a gazillion trees, okay, so, no matter what red, whether B is red or black, we will think about this later, now let's think what happens if D has two black children, now, if D has two black children, now we can look at this small subtree, in this small subtree, we have the property five already correct, why, because all the paths that go into alpha, beta, gamma, delta, epsilon, and zeta, have the same number of black nodes on them, so why, because, now, let's think B is red, if B is red, then X is double black, so alpha has two, and beta has two, gamma and delta pass through D and C, so it's also two, and epsilon and zeta both pass through D and E, so it's also two, right, so all of the paths, if B is red, have a two, and if B is black for the same reason, they also pass through B, so they have three, but all of them are either two or three, so all of them have the same number of blacks on the paths. Okay, great, and now what we want to do is we want to change that, I want to change that by simple recoloring, so what are we doing? We are just putting the double black of the X to its parent, so if X was double black, which it was, then its parent will either be double black or red-black, black, right, which is why we said new X next to B. That means that B now counts for an additional black and X doesn't anymore, so what we get is we still get either a two or three for alpha and beta, but we would get a three or a four through the other, but we can fix that by recoloring D to red. That removes the black from the tree and adds a black on the path, so this is why still all the nodes have the same number of blacks, because it has an additional black now at B, but no longer a black at A, and we've removed the black from D, so basically what we did is we took the double black of X and the black of D, put it to B, and removed the two blacks from A and D. So that's just a recoloring operation, more or less. So if we have two black children, we just do a recoloring operation and we're finished. And then, of course, we have to continue with the parent, because the parent now has an odd color, which is either red black or black black. Right? But all, everything below it is fixed now. Okay, great. So this is case two. So case two has then finished and we have to continue with the parent, all the other possibilities. Okay, now, the other things are case three. So case three is something we will do, we will change to case four before we change anything. So we will repair case three by transferring it to case four. and case three says that the black sibling of X has a red left child. So what we want to do is we want to get it to be a red right child. Okay, so what we're doing is we are taking oops, okay, sorry. So what we're doing is we're producing another rotation. So now we're doing a left rotation of the three elements down there. So the C, the D, and the E. So performing a right rotation, sorry, performing a right rotation with C, D, and E, right? The right rotation makes C go to where D was. It takes the left child of C, stays the left child, which is the gamma. Now, the D was the parent of C. Afterwards, it will be the right child of C, but it will keep the right child of C as its left child, which is the delta, right? So this is the typical right rotation, and the right child of D stays the right child of D, which is the E. So this looks like an imbalanced tree now a bit, but it's not really because we've cut off all the irrelevant parts, the deltas, the gammas, and so on. So now what do we have to check? We have to check two things. The first thing we have to check is whether all of the colors, five, all of the, so five stays as it was before, and what we've really done is we've changed, well, we've exchanged the colors of C and D, this is also important, and what we have afterwards, is that a left child, a red left child, is now a red right child, but the sibling of X is still black, right? Right? Okay, great. Now, let's count. We don't care about B now, we only count the other nodes. Okay, so, if we go through alpha, we count two, because X is still double black, right? The X says we have an additional black. So, to alpha, we have a two, to beta, we have a two, now, to gamma, we have a one, to delta, we have a one, because it's only C, and to epsilon and theta, we have a two each, because we're going through C and to E, which might be one more, if we change the color of B, but never mind. Okay, now, let us, sorry, yeah, and now, let's go to the right side. Well, of course, the hops through X still count for two, so alpha and beta stay at two. Gamma, who only counted the D on the left side, now only counts the C on the right side, so gamma is still a one. Delta counted only the D on the left side, now only counts the C on the right side, because D is the red, so delta is still a one, and epsilon and theta go through on the left side to D and E, and on the right side to C and E, so both have a two. So the numbers didn't change, right? So this is the important repairing, so the reducing steps, case one and case three, didn't change the numbers, the repairing step two kept the balance, and now we have to check case four, and we also have to check whether this keeps all the balance properly. Now, let's look at case four. In case four, we have, we always again have to look through alpha, beta, gamma, delta, epsilon, and theta, and now the right child of D is red. And we repair this again by a left rotation of the nodes B, D, and C. Okay, so we again perform a left rotation, and afterwards, we have to figure out where our new X is. Okay, so X was double black, so we do a left rotation. In the left rotation, we again move the B down to be the new child of D, except for its, instead of its parent, we rewire the C to be a child of B now instead of being a child of D, and we keep the children of D and the children of B as they were before, and then we do a recoloring. So what will be the recoloring? The recoloring will be the color of C stays as it was before, so we don't care about the color of C. We exchange the colors of D and B, making B black now, and making D the color B was before. We change the color of E from red to black, and we remove the double black from X. Okay? Now let's count. Let's count whether all the paths stay as they were before. Okay, so what happens is we pass through B, which will be later D, so we don't have to count it for the moment. We only have to count the others. So X is double black on the left side, so alpha and beta get a 2. Let's look at the right side, and the right side pass through B and through A, which means that alpha and beta also get a 2. Okay, let's look at gamma and delta. Gamma and delta pass through D and through C, which means we have a one hop and the color of C. Well, here in gamma and delta, they pass through B and through C. B is a one hop and the color of C, so gamma and delta also don't change, and now we have to count epsilon and theta. Well, on the left side, they pass only through D, which counts because E is red. On the right side, they pass through E, which is now black, and so both of them have a one. So we didn't change the numbers, going, the black numbers, in the left, from the left to the right side. But what is interesting is we don't have a double colored node anymore on the right subtree. We didn't have to move the color of X anywhere. And so the only thing that remains is root. The root node is the only one that might have changed, which could be the parent of D. But if it's not the parent of D, it's still the root node. So the new node that is actually interesting now is the root node. That's the only one that might be a problem. Okay, now let's look at the last case. the last case is if, so that's the node that has still two colors. The only node, right? X is the node that has two colors. And now let's assume that we are at the root. And let's think that the root has two colors. Right? So either the root can be now red, black, or the root can be black, black. Okay, what happens if the root is red, black? It's just we remove the red from the red, black, and color the root black. And if the root is black, black, it counts for two blacks. But who cares? It's the root node. So every path going through the root node either is the root node, starts at the root node, or doesn't go through the root node. So we can't just remove the double black from the root node. So if the root node is double black, we just call it black. And if the root node is red, black, we just call it black. So the root node will be black at the end, which makes property two, right? So once we're at the root node, the double color just evaporates, and let's be absorbed in the root, this black. black. Right? And so by that way, if you think how can the height of a tree ever reduce, this is how the black height of the tree can reduce by one. Because once we're at the root, and the root has a double color, the double color is removed, and this removes the black height again of the tree. Okay, so this is how red, black, delete works, and now let's go back to the algorithm. Okay, so what does red, black, delete, fix up do? It's checking whether we are a left child, because otherwise we do everything mirror imaged. If we're at the left child, we check for our sibling, which is the right child of our parent, which is we call W. And now we check whether W is red. This is case one, and case one says that we need to repair it in order to get the sibling black. So this is the first case. We reduce case one to any of the other three cases, which means that we left rotate it, we make our sibling black, we make our parent red, we left rotate the tree, and we call W the new right child of our parent, which is now black, because we just colored it black, and afterwards, the left color, afterwards W will be black. Okay, if our sibling is black, it can either have two black children, which we can solve by simple recoloring operation. This is case two. Otherwise, it has a left or a right red child, and if it has a right, so yeah, the question is why can't it have two children? Well, that's impossible, because of the no two children node. So the only thing, four can be violated is by having two, one red child, a red node. You cannot have two red children, this is not possible. The most thing is one red child. Okay, now, if the left color is black, sorry, if the right color is black, then the left color is red, and we have case three, which we have to repair in order to get to case four by right rotation. That's what we discussed, so we exchange the colors, we make the left child of W black, we make W itself red, we right rotate one, and the new sibling is now the right child of the parent of X again. After the rotation, and then we're in case four, and case four is something we solve by left rotation and by large recoloring operation. This is what we discussed, and afterwards, the new double colored node is the root node. Alternatively, in the other cases, it stays X, as we had before. And then the other algorithm, so this is just the algorithmic implementation of the explanations that we just got through, and if you look at the right path, then you can see that everything changes. this. So here, we have a right node rotate instead of a left node rotate. Every left is a right, every right is a left, so this is the other half of the algorithm. And at the end of the algorithm, the new color of our node itself will be black. So this is always what we had, so we don't have a double something, we only have a single something, and the single something will always be black. Okay, so this is red-black tree fix-up, which is called whenever we have removed a black node from the tree, and this now solves all of these five problems again, and the trick with the double-colored node made sure that this property stays correct throughout all of the operations, and that it stays correct is something we just did by counting, right? We did all the countings to make sure that this property always stays as it is, and the others are then a simple consequence of that. Okay, right, are there any questions about deleting a node from a red-black tree? No. Yes, who has a question? nobody. Nobody. Well, I think a good idea is I've tried to explain it as good as I could, but to really understand it, what we should do is you should draw at home a small tree and remove various nodes in all of the cases, and go through the algorithm and change the colors in your drawing, because this is, I think, almost the only way to really grasp what happens, right? So just try it yourself once with a small tree and remove a node and go through the algorithm step by step, and then you can see what happens. There are actually, I think there are also animations in the internet, but I'm not sure whether this really helps. I think it really helps if you do it once by hand and looking at it to really understand what happens. Red-black trees nowadays are the most widely used search trees. At least they're implemented in the GNU C standard or C++ standard library. I think they're also in the Java maps and so. So many nowadays are implementing red-black trees. There are also other guaranteed logarithmic height trees, like AVL trees, work a bit differently, but I think the red-black trees have like red-black they have actually turned out to be the most efficient ones, usually. delete. Delete, how many operations does delete do? Well, it also only depends on the height of the tree. Why? Because after at most three rotations, we are at least one level up. In the case for case, we're even totally up at the root node. So, the only thing that happens if we do many case two steps in a row, then we only go up by at least one hop, and that means that it also depends only on the height of the tree, and the theta of one operation, which is at most three rotations, and so also red-black tree delete is an order of log n operation. And so by now, we have done all of the operations on this binary search tree if we implement it as a red-black tree in order of log n operations. Like we had an insert order of log n, we had a delete in order of log n, and all the others like search, which is order of the height, and we've proved that the red-black tree is always order of log n high, is order of log n, and all the other operations as well. So like successor, predecessor, minimum and maximum, all of them are order of log n now, and this is the best basically you can do for a binary search tree. All of the operations in order of log n of the number of elements in there. Okay, well, that basically ends a very important part of our lecture course. And this is the first part which tells us stuff about basic data structures. Now, if you're a data scientist, then you have to do other things as well than just juggling basic data structures. So we've already done things like sorting, we've done things like searching, processing, we've done things like storing stuff properly, right? We've learned a few important data structures like sets, ordered sets, then we did hash tables, and we did heaps, which is priority queues. so now we take that knowledge and we want to do algorithms. So it's called algorithms and data structures and not just data structures. So we need to do algorithms as well. And the first thing is we will have to discuss, well, now we got a bit more, well, I don't know, we're still algorithmic. So what do we have to do? Once we have a data structure that actually was able to store our data properly so that we can do stuff with it, we need to actually do stuff with our data. And there are several basic operations that you want to do with your data. The first thing is you want to get a model of your data. So somehow until now you have only data points. We have points that tell you something. You've ordered it by some key and then you have properties. Let's think about analyzing properties of the people in this room. Right? So all of you have height, weight, hair color, and other things. And all of these things we could in principle store. Now we have to analyze it, like the percentage of people, the distribution of the height, the distribution of the size of the shoes, whatever we want. So if we have a company that wants to order shoes for their sales rooms, it's important for them to know how to order them. How many 46s, how many size 35, or whatever. I don't know. because if you order too few of them, people will go somewhere else to buy the shoes, because it's very seldom that people run in your shop, ask for a shoe size, you don't have it, and they stay there and wait for two weeks until you get the shoes in their size. Unless you are a chimichu or so, I don't know. People probably don't care for waiting for two weeks, I mean. But if you are any other store, then people will run somewhere else. And if you order, I don't know, 20 pairs of 49s, then unless you're stuffing one of the American basketball teams, it's very likely that you will send most of them back, and likely your producers won't take them back, so you will throw them in the bin because you even cannot sell them off because nobody will buy five shoes of size 49. So it's probably a good idea that you know what your customer base actually has shoe sizes, right? So how many shoes? So these are things you might want to figure out. Now, if you replace data points, right? So you have only single data points. So you have to replace these data points by some information that has less parameters than all of the, I don't know, one or two million data points, like if you have a store in Vienna, right? You have two million possible customers. So if you would have the chance to measure the feed size of all Viennese people or people living in Vienna, then you would have a very nice distribution, but the chance is that you haven't. At least I haven't been sitting at home having somebody come to me and measure the size of my feet. So they might need to get the information from somewhere else. And so how do you get this information, right? And how do you actually at the end figure out what the probability distribution of things is? And what you usually have to do is reduce the dimension of the problem from two million data points to a few parameters. And of course, many of you have learned in school that most of these things are normally distributed in some sense, right? So the shoe sizes are normally distributed. Now, is this true? Are they? Are the shoe sizes of people normally distributed? well, no, there aren't. Why? Because even if it's getting less and less important, there are still people who have two X chromosomes and people who have an X and a Y chromosome. And that's the biological sex. And biological sex determines shoe size medium. or average. That means actually the shoe sizes are not really distributed normally. But they have two bumps, right? They have two peaks. There is this super imposition of two normal distributions more or less. And which is becoming more and more relevant if you want to sell shoes for everybody, right? Especially nowadays, where diversity is becoming more and more important. Because there are people now from biological sex, XX, that want to buy men's shoes. And there are people from biological sex, XY, that want to buy women's shoes, at least what's called women's shoes before. And so you no longer have the nice property of knowing that both of the sizes are actually normally distributed. They aren't any longer. Well, depending on the country you sell your shoes in. There are some countries where you won't, but others where you will. And so it very much depends on what you actually want to do, right? And so we need a way to actually optimally get an information out of our data points without looking at all the data points individually because this is something we can't do. We won't do any operations, any calculations or anything by plugging in all the 2 million possible data points every time because that's just very time consuming. So we want to reduce these things by getting parameters. And these parameters have to be determined from your data points, right? So as we say, let's say we have a normal distribution like height we only take somehow. We just assume that things are normally distributed. Like IQ. IQ is normally distributed among the whole populace even if some people don't think it is, but it is. So that's a fact. And so let's take IQ. Like this is normally distributed. And so if it is normally distributed we have to figure out what is the mean and we have to figure out what's the variance because this is the two parameters that tell you how this Gaussian looks like. So we have to figure out what these are. And of course how do we want to choose our parameters? We want to choose our parameters so that they are the optimal choice. We want to take the best possible choice of our mean and of our variance. We don't want to just put down numbers and say well that's it. But we will take the two numbers that fit best. So most or many many of the data science operations that we do is we want to estimate parameters. and estimating parameters we want to do best possible. And doing something best possible is as we mathematicians call it we have to solve an optimization problem. The optimization problem says that we want to minimize the deviation for example of something. And you will have to solve other optimization problems as well. Other optimization problems tell you well you have a company and the company tells you well I want to buy my shoes. How do I buy my shoes optimally? And you want to tell them well of course what you want to do is you will maximize your revenue. This is what a company usually does. Maximize their revenue. So we want to maximize our revenue by buying only those shoes that we very likely can sell without going to sales where we have to dump them for half the price so that at least somebody buys them even if they don't fit perfectly well. But this reduces revenue, right? Well, they still make revenue even if they send you the shoes for half the size. Half the price, I mean, the revenue will be smaller but there will be still some revenue left. But this is okay for most of the companies. But of course it diminishes their return in investment. And so they rather like to avoid that. And so this is also an optimization problem, right? Ordering the optimal number in some sense, whatever optimal means. And so a very important part of algorithmic also for data scientists is to solve optimization problems. there will be, I think, as far as I remember, there is a lecture course even on that. But we will need to do some basics already in this algorithm class because at the end we want to find methods to actually model our data, right? And not every data can be modeled by using a Gaussian distribution. Some of the data have to be modeled in more complicated ways, the structure. And one of the most modern things is neural networks. And we will talk a bit about neural networks later in the lecture course. But in order to train them we also have to solve an optimization problem. So optimization problems are a very, very important part of data science. And tomorrow we will do something which is called dynamic programming which is the first thing about optimization. And so for today my talking is over. We'll see you again tomorrow and have a nice afternoon. Yeah.
