to the lecture course in algorithm state instructions. So I'm really glad that so many people are showing up to the lecture course. I hope that today the U-Bahn has a problem. Because otherwise, somehow I see that attending the lecture course is not so interesting anymore. But as I said, if very often very few people show up to the lecture course, I will stop recording it. And so this is the first strike today and we will see what happens. So we are just stuck in the middle of red-black trees and augmenting them. So augmenting data structures and basically the whole chapter is about augmenting red-black trees. And we've already discussed this tree, which is about calculating order statistics. Calculating how many, what is the rank of a given index or to find the 17th element in a sorted list. And we want to do this dynamically. And since we know that red-black trees can very much represent an assorted set of keys, we said that one idea is we could add an additional element in there, which is the size of the subtree, which is the number that is written below all of the keys. And using the size of the subtree, last week we've already discussed how to find out the rank of a given element. And on the other hand, how to find the, I don't want to say 17th element or the i-th element given i. And the data structure, but what we did not, what we didn't talk about actually, was how to update this size element, right? So once we have that binary red-black tree, the question is, how can we make sure that these numbers on there actually stay correct? And, well, the point is, the only thing that we have to make sure is that when inserting or deleting, after inserting or deleting, the size is correct, the size numbers are correct, and that they stay correct whenever we do a rotation, because that's the only operations that we're doing. When we're inserting something, when we're deleting something, and then when we're repairing something, the only thing that changes subtrees is a rotation. Everything else is only color changes, and color changes don't change how many nodes are there. So let's think about what the rotation is doing, and let's think about how we can actually update the size whenever we add a new node. So when we think about it, what happens if we add a new node, if we insert an element into a red-black tree? Well, we are going down to the correct leaf of the tree, and then we're inserting it either as the left or as the right child of the correct node, as a new leaf. So a new node first is added in red, and it's added as a new leaf, right, in a red-black tree. But then we do know actually what happens, because what we're doing is we're searching downwards one path, and once we're at the bottom, then we're inserting a new leaf, right? So we do know how all the nodes have to be updated once we're walking down, because every node that we're passing, when we're walking down to find the node where we insert the new element, they will have a subtree that is one higher than before, because we will just add one new element. So whenever we insert the node, what we're doing is we're running down the tree, and every node that we're meeting for that, we increment the size by one, and then at the end, when we insert the new leaf, the new leaf will have a new size subtree of one, because the subtree always contains the node itself, right? So we're walking down until we're down there. We're increasing the size of every element that we're passing in the insert operation, and then the new node will be added with color red, and it will be added with size one. Okay, so this makes sure that after inserting, before we correct anything, the numbers in the tree are correct. Now, we need to do the insert update, the repair after insert, right, of the red-black tree. Okay, so this consists of actually two different operations. The first operation is changing the color. Changing the color doesn't change the size of the subtree, so we do nothing. So the only thing that remains is we need to think what happens if we have an... Well, I will show the pictures over there. It's better. I don't have to turn on and off. So this is what the rotation looks like, right? So here we have left or right rotations. So this is how the trees change. Now, if you look at that, what we can see is that the trees that are written as four, six, and seven there by chance, they don't change their size because they only change the places. So the whole subtree does not change its size, right? So the triangles don't change the sizes. So we don't have to do anything. The only sizes that might change are the two nodes that are actually exchanged, which is the X node and the Y node, right? So let's think what happens if we go from the left to the right. So if we're doing a right rotation. Well, if we're doing a right rotation, what we can see is that the sizes of the subtree of Y on the left side is equal to the size of the subtrees of X on the right side because Y. And Y has as descendants the trees 7, 4, 6 and one node, which is the X node, right? So if we're counting the size of the subtrees of the Y, we have to count everything on the left, which is the X, which is one node, and the sum of the trees 4 and 6. Yeah? And if we count the nodes on the right of Y, then that's only the 7. So all together, we have the size of the 4, we have the size of the 6, we have the size of the 7, and we have one additional for the X and one additional for the Y. Right? So this is the size of the Y. On the right-hand side, that's the size of the X because the size of the X is the size of the three subtrees that don't change. The 4, the 7, the 6 plus 1 for the Y and 1 for the X, which is the same thing. So after rotating from left to right, the new size of X is the old size of Y. Or the other way around, it's just the other way around. Right? So the only thing that we have to think about is how to update the size of X, the size of Y on the right-hand side. Right? On the right-hand side, the size of X is equal to the size of Y before. And on the right-hand side, the size of Y is easily calculated because that's the size of the 4 plus the size of the 7 plus 1. So this is easily checkable. We only have to check the sizes of children, add them up and add 1. And on the other hand, if we're doing a left rotate, we just exchange the Y by the X. So the update is very simple. It's just one copy operation and one addition, or actually two additions, which is an order of one operation that we have to do. And afterwards, the sizes of all the subtrees, again, are correct because the parents also don't change the size because the trees are only rearranged, but the number of nodes is never changed. Okay. So, therefore, how many rotations do you have to do at most if you update the red-black tree? Okay. So, let's do this again until it's correct again. Well, it's only a fixed number. I think I asked you to think about it for the exercises class. Actually, it's two. After insertion, you at most have to do two rotations. After deletion, you have to do at most three rotations. And for deleting a node, things work very much the same. So, because you basically know which node you delete, you can just take the node that you're going to delete at the end. And then you go from this node upwards through the tree until you hit the root and decrement the number size by one in every iteration. And then when you repair the tree, you only have to do rotations again, which we know how to update. And you only need at most three rotations. That means that updating the size in a red-black tree is an order of log n operation at most. Because we have to go up or go down. And this is only the depth of the tree. And we know that the depth of the tree is order of log n and the size of the elements stored in the tree. And so, updating the size in a red-black tree is very cheap. So, this is a possibility to not only get the sorted structure, but also to get an order of log n operation to actually know the rank of every element or to find the ith element in the red-black tree. Okay, so, what kind of operations or what kind of additional information in a red-black tree can be updated in order of log n? And the idea is basically whenever we are able to update or calculate the information at the node only from information from its two children and from information that is at the node itself. So, if we know that the information only is constructed in an order of one operation from information that its children have plus information at the root, then it's guaranteed that the update of that structure only takes order of log n operations. Well, why is this the case? Well, we've already seen that when we insert something, then the only thing that changes are a chain of children that goes up from the inserted node to the root, and we know that's only log n many. So, even if it's not so simple like in the size update, we can just first insert the element in the graph, and then going from there upwards and updating all the information for all the nodes that we've just visited, right? Which is log n because we know that the depth is only log n. On the other hand, if we delete a node, that's the same trick, right? So, we just take the node, we delete it from the tree, and then we walk upwards through the tree until we hit the root and update all the information, which is also a log n operation. And the final thing we have to do is we have to repair the red-black tree. And if we repair the red-black tree, we have only either two or three rotations to do. And also for a rotation, we've just seen the image, right? So, for rotation, we have the same thing to do. So, if we look at that, also here, the nodes that are the root of the subtrees 6, 4, and 7 don't change because the subtrees don't change, so their children don't change. The only things that change are the children of X and of Y, right? So, even if we don't have the same idea, like the size of the subtrees, we really have to compute something. We only have to compute the new information for Y on the right-hand side plus the new information for X on the right-hand side, which is only two operations, right? Only updating two nodes. And the same is true for the left rotation, which tells us that the theorem that is written there, which I don't copy to the blackboard because it's just a very simple thing. I've just explained how it works, that whenever we have an attribute, an additional attribute, that we can calculate with an order of one operation from the attributes of the children and some information that is on the node itself, then we always can update this attribute for the whole tree, for every node in the tree, with an effort of order of log n when we insert or when we delete nodes. And then we can use that additional information to actually capture some information that is encoded in the F. And in order to show how this works, we take one more interesting application of augmented red-black tree, and this is interval trees. So sometimes you have to find overlapping intervals, like you have time ranges, okay? So let's assume we have time ranges that tell you when you can actually deliver something to somewhere, right? So sometimes you can only send goods to your customers in a specific window of time. Well, sometimes you can only park there between, I don't know, 10 and 12, because only then the delivery zone is free, or some of your customers might be in a pedestrian zone, which you only can enter between 8 and 9 in the morning. Or I have no idea. Some customer services are only open between then and then. So what not? So you can store these intervals in a tree. But sorting intervals is not so easy, right? Because how do you sort it? By the midpoints or by the beginnings, because intervals can overlap even if they're not the same, right? So one has opened from 8 to 10, the other one has opened from 9 to 5. So intervals might overlap. So it's not simple, trivial to sort intervals. So how? By what, right? Because there is not a total ordering on interval. So sorting them linearly is not so simple. So having a search tree, what is the key to store in the search tree? But on the other hand, what we want to know is we want to find, let's see, let's say we have time between, well, let's take a nice application. So we have all the times of possible venues to visit. So we are in a new city and we want to do sightseeing, right? So we can look at the internet and check. So all the city is flowing over of tourists, right? So you have to book all your tickets in advance on the internet. And for every ticket, you get a range of times where you can actually get your ticket ticket to visit a specific site that you want to see on this day. And now you have to choose, right? You know that you've already planned your day and you have an additional free time, let's say between 10 and 12, where you want to find some venue where you can get tickets for. So what you want to find is an interval that actually overlaps your free time somehow. Well, that's one possibility to search. Okay, let's think how we can do that. So what we would like to do is we would like to add the information somehow in a red-black tree so we can find overlapping intervals. There's actually several possibilities to store the intervals in a red-black tree. Okay, and just thinking about overlapping activities and scheduling activities, one possibility is to store things by, well, what ends first or what starts first or what starts last or anything. So the simplest thing is we order our intervals first by the starting time. The starting times are totally ordered. So this is a possibility to actually insert all of our intervals in a red-black tree. Okay, so let's think about that. So first, we put all our time intervals that we know into our red-black tree, ordered by starting time. Okay, great. Now, we have all of these intervals in the tree, but this is not enough information to actually search for overlapping intervals, right? And why? Because the end times are missing. We don't know anything about ending times by now. We want to have one thing that can be updated, that can be simply updated, so we want to have one additional information. So what would the interesting additional information be that we can check? Well, we want to have an idea of what the time ranges are that are covered in that subtree, right? So we know the beginning times already because things are sorted by the beginning times. We don't have any information about the end times. If we want to cover the time range, actually, that is included in that subtree, what we need to know is at least what the final end time is of all the activities in the subtree, right? So let's try with that one. Let's try with we store at every node the final time of all the intervals that are inside of that whole subtree. This is basically a maximum operation. Let's think whether this is something we can update in order of log n time. So what does the maximum information of the end time depend on? Well, it's quite simple at a node. We can simply compute it from the maximum end time of the left subtree, the maximum end time of the right subtree, and the end time of the interval that is represented at that node, right? Which is just a maximum of three numbers. And it only depends on the left subtree of the right subtree and of the node itself. And so by what we've just seen by the theorem, this can be updated in order of log n time, right? So let's think about that. Let's store our tree with that information in mind. So what we want to do is we want to store our intervals by, well, at the point we store the interval, we take our red-black tree, we sort the intervals in the red-black tree by the time of their start, by the starting time or by the lower bound, as it's called in an interval. And then down the additional information is the maximum upper bound of all the subtree. So let's have a look whether the information in there is really what we're thinking about. Let's look at, for example, the leftmost interval. Well, this, of course, has the first starting time because that's a red-black tree, so it's sorted by size. So therefore, the leftmost leaf has the slowest starting time, which is the 0-3 node. And the maximum, of course, is 3 because, well, it ends at 3. The 6-10 node ends at 10. And so the 5-8 node up there, it's a black 5-8 node, also contains a 10 because that's the maximum ending upper bound of all the whole subtree here. Right? And then we propagate this up. The 8-9 node actually contains a 23. Why? Because its right subtree has an upper bound of 23. And in the left subtree, we do the same. So this is what is stored in our data structure. So we know that the beginning times are sorted. And for the end times, we only know the maximum end time of the whole subtree. Now, what does this help us? Well, let's assume that we're searching for something. And these are encoded minutes of the day or whatever. So let's abstract away from the beginning time, from the starting time and the end time. We're just taking lower bounds and upper bounds now. Okay. So what happens if we search for an interval whose lower bound is 31? And we start at the root. What do we know? If the lower bound of the interval that we are searching for is 31, we know that it's not. There is no interval in the tree that overlaps it because we know that the maximum end time of everything is 30. So the maximum upper bound of everything is 30. So if we're searching for something whose lower bound is 31, we know that it's not in the tree. Okay. So the same cannot be said for the upper bound. So if our upper bound is minus 1, we don't know anything yet. So we have to search for it. But what we do know is that the lower bounds are actually sorted in the red-black tree. So we do know what to do. If we're searching, in principle, if we're looking for an upper bound, what we can do is we can search for the minimum of the tree. And the minimum of the tree has a lower bound of 0. So we know that nothing overlaps something that is an upper bound of minus 1. And this is an order of log in operation. Now, what we would like to do is we would like to combine these two ideas somehow so that we only have to do one search in the tree. All right. So let's search for an overlapping interval. And let's understand why the following algorithm is actually correct. It's quite simple. So let's look at that. So we have our augmented red-black tree. And in this augmented, I should turn off the lights, right? I always have to turn off the lights. Okay. Now, you have to tell me if you can't see it. It's difficult for me to see that. So if we look at the algorithm, it looks quite simple, right? So let's see what it's doing. It's starting at root. And, of course, if X, the current, X is always the current node we're at. If the current node is nil, then we don't find the interval because in that tree, there is no interval. And if there is no interval, it doesn't overlap with our interval. So if we're nil, we can stop. And the other thing is if the interval does not overlap the interval that we're in, then we have to continue. If it overlaps the interval that we're in, we have found something. So if we're looking for an interval that overlaps our interval that we're looking for, like our time range, we want to find a venue where it can go. So when we found an interval that overlaps, we're finished. We only have to return that. So the only reason for a continuing of the search is when we are not at nil and we are at an interval that does not overlap. Then we have to continue searching. Okay, so this is the termination of the while loop here in line two. Now, let's see the idea of that three lines, of those three lines. Okay, first thing is if it says if there is a left node, if there is a left node and the maximum, so the end time, the maximum of the left node is greater or equal the lower bound of our node, then we're going left. Does this make sense? Well, let's think. We want to find an overlapping interval. So the idea is, well, we have the choice when we're at the node to go left or to go right. Of course, we only want to go left if there is a possibility to go left, which is that it's not nil, the left subtree. And the other check is whether the maximum of the whole subtree is bigger than our lower bound. Well, what we do know, we do know that the maximum in the left subtree exists. This is something we've updated. So we do know there is some node in there that is bigger than our beginning, our lower bound. So there is a very likely chance that this left subtree contains a node that actually overlaps with us. So if the left subtree is nil, then there is nothing in the left subtree. If the left subtree is not nil, but the maximum is below our lower bound, we've just seen that it cannot contain any interval that overlaps us. Because all the intervals end before we start. So nothing can overlap. So we don't have to go left if none of these, if it's nil or if the maximum is smaller than our lower bound. Well, if we don't go left and we haven't found anything, then it's a good idea to go right, which is what this thing is doing. So it's definitely traversing the whole tree until it hits either an interval that overlaps us or until it hits nil. Right? Okay, so I say that this algorithm definitely finds an overlapping interval if there is anyone in the tree. Okay, if there is an overlapping interval in the tree, this algorithm will find it. Okay, so this is not trivial because we only take one choice and we don't look on the other side. Right? So if we have decided to go left, we don't look right anymore. So this is a decision that we have to understand. Right? So we have to make sure that this decision is true. Because we have not yet seen that the intervals in the left and the right subtree don't overlap. This is something we don't know. So what we have to prove is if we take here the choice that we're going left and we don't find anything in the left subtree, then we have to prove that there is also nothing in the right subtree. Otherwise, the algorithm would be wrong. Right? If we can't go left and if we go right, then we haven't done anything wrong. Right? Because excluding the left tree is by proof. Right? So we know that we only don't go left if we can prove that there is nothing in the left side. Right? Because we don't go left only in two cases. The first case is the left subtree doesn't contain anything, which is clear that we don't find anything if it doesn't contain anything. And the other one, the other choice is that the maximum of the left subtree is below our minimum. So both decisions are a proof that there is nothing on the left side. Right? So what we have to prove is that if we're going left and we don't find anything on the left side, then there also won't be anything on the right side. Okay? Okay. Now let's think. What can be a reason why? What can be the only reason why if we are going left, we don't find anything on the left side? Okay? So let's think about that. So if we're going left, what we do know is that the maximum in the left subtree is bigger than our minimum. So the only reason why we don't find anything on the left side is that our maximum, right, never ever overlaps with the minimum of an interval on the left side that also contains. So let's draw this. Okay? So what we do know is that on the left side, so this is the maximum. So on the left side, we have several intervals. So what we do know is that the maximum of all the intervals does not exceed this. Okay? So our interval looks something like this. So our interval that we're looking at has a lower bound of something and has an upper bound of something. But we don't care about the upper bound. The only thing we know is that our lower bound is smaller than the maximum of those intervals. So what can happen that this interval here doesn't overlap anything in there? Can it look like this? Well, no, it can't. So our interval is equal to the maximum. And so if our interval contains the maximum, then we will find an overlap. But that means that we only not find anything on the left-hand side if our interval does not contain the maximum. Right? So that means this is already impossible. Our interval has to be somewhere like this. So it does not contain the maximum. And there is a second thing. The second thing is that every interval here on the left-hand side that contains the maximum cannot contain our maximum because otherwise we would overlap. So that means that the minimum of the intervals that contain the maximum on the left-hand side has to be bigger than our maximum. Right? So this is important to understand. Every interval on the right-hand side that contains the maximum for every this interval, its minimum has to be bigger than our maximum. Right? Otherwise, if this was not true, like here, so here the interval, the minimum is smaller than our maximum. And so this interval and we overlap. Therefore, we would find it. So if our interval does not overlap with anything in there, there are two intervals that contain the maximum. That means that our interval has to look like this. Well, has to look like this, that our maximum has to be smaller than the minimum of that interval. Yes? Because otherwise we would overlap. So we know from the maximum that there is an interval that has that upper bound, which is equal to the maximum. And our interval maximum has to be smaller than the minimum of that interval. Otherwise, we would find an overlap. So if the left subtree does not contain an overlap, we know that our maximum has to be quite small. But now we know that all the lower bounds, all the lower bounds of the intervals are sorted in the red-black tree. Right? But that means that all the lower bounds in the right subtree have to be bigger than that lower bound. Right? And so they can't overlap with us. Because we've already proved that the maximum is smaller than one of the intervals in there. So all the intervals in the right subtree have a larger lower bound. So they also can't overlap with us. And this is why we can take the left side and have just proved that if the left side doesn't contain an interval that overlaps with us, the right side can't contain an interval that overlaps with us. So we can take the choice there to go left. Because if we don't find anything on the left side, we've just proved that we can't find anything on the right side. Okay? So this is why this works. That's why this works for two reasons. First, because the maximum excludes that our maximum is bigger than the maximum, if we don't find anything on the left-hand side. And we know that the maximum has to be smaller than the lower bound of at least one interval on the left side. But the intervals on the right side have lower bounds that are bigger than all the lower bounds on the left side. Which means that we can't have an overlapping interval on the right side as well. And so, therefore, this interval search is correct. And we will definitely find an overlapping thing. And as we see, we only take one of the branches. And we've discussed that in the exercises class. That this is a reason why we have an order of log n operation only. Right? So that's why we can find in interval trees, in order of log n, we can find overlapping intervals. And this is one additional idea, how to augment a red-black tree to get a new data structure that can do things a red-black tree itself cannot do. Okay. So that was it about overlapping, about data structures. The next chapter we are going to discuss is one of the probably most important data structures in data science. And this is chapter 18, and this is B-trees. Well, whenever you're talking about data structures for computer science, for data science, there is one application that you will have to organize all the time as a data scientist. And that's basically databases, right? So you have to do, whenever you do data science, you will have to work with databases all day long. Databases about customers, databases about, I have no idea. Databases about data science. So it's data science. And data is stored in databases. Therefore, you have to work with them. And the interesting question is, how are data organized in databases? And actually, why do we store stuff in databases? Well, usually, nowadays, most data science is about big data analysis, right? So we will analyze data in the sizes of terabytes and not megabytes, usually. And if you work with terabytes of data, what is important is that you will start to meet different constraints than before. Why? Why? Why? Why? Well, until now, we've discussed algorithms and their effort. So how much effort we have to spend in order to do? I have no idea. In order to add data to a sorted set, in order to find something in a sorted set, in order to find something in an unsorted set, in order to sort data and things like that. We've proved upper bounds and lower bounds on effort and so on. And the only thing we concentrated on was the effort one operation took, right? And we always compared operation on computers, right? So we thought that, for example, one comparison is the effort that we have to take. And for sorting operations, we talked about how many comparisons are necessary in order to find something, in order to sort something. For red-black trees, also it's comparisons, right? We have to compare the new key with the key stored in our tree. And so this was our main emphasis until now. However, what is the most important assumption that we take when we count algorithm effort like that? Well, the most important assumption we take is that all the comparisons that we want to make have actually the same effort. And that usually means they are residing in computer memory, and then the CPU has to take them, compare them, and give us the result. But if we're working with terabytes of data, we can be very sure that on our computer, most of the data will actually not be in computer memory. Most of the data will reside somewhere else, either on the internet or on a hard drive. So not in the RAM, but on the disk that we have, right? So most of the database all the time is on the disk, and only very small parts of the data will actually be in computer memory. Which means that we have to think about what it means to actually access memory or to access data on a computer, and how much effort that is. Okay, so what are the various areas where data can reside on a computer? Well, the computer, and we exclude for the moment, for the moment we exclude neural networks and GPUs, because there is another type of thing. And then it very much depends on whether you have an Apple computer or whether you have a PC or whatever. Sorry, so Intel-based, let's say, computer. Or a new NVIDIA-based computer. So it very much depends on what kind of computer you have. But let's forget about GPUs for the moment. Let's talk about CPU computers. So a CPU computer has already, as a direct access, usually four types of memory. Four classes of memory. The modern ones have four classes of memory. They have the RAM, which is the large thing that your computer displays or when you buy it. Like if you buy nowadays a laptop or a computer, the average laptop has between 8 and 16 gigabytes of RAM. And so R-E-M is random access memory, where the computer just tells you a number, and then it can access the data structure. So a computer has RAM. Random access memory. Random access memory. And a random access memory, usually on a computer, is in the, let's say, 8 to 16 gigabytes if you buy it. If you have a very good laptop, it might have 32. If you have an old one, it might have two or four. But usually all modern computers have something above a gigabyte. Even mobile phones nowadays approach several gigabytes of memory. Okay, great. So that's several gigabytes. Access time for those is around 50 nanoseconds. So if you want to have a specific data point, it's around the 50 nanoseconds that it takes to access that data. Roughly. If you have, and then you have faster memory, which is cache. So there is third level cache. Second level cache. And first level cache. And they get increasingly bigger, third, sec, or smaller. They get increasingly smaller and increasingly faster. So first level cache. So first level cache basically resides at the CPU core that you're working with. So that basically means you have an access time of less than a nanosecond. Right? Right? Right? Because, well, if your processor is average for a laptop, it's about two and a half gigahertz. So you have a lot of times approximately, which means that you have about 0.4 nanoseconds access time for the first level cache. And then you have other less frequently accessible memory layers. And they get increasingly slower. But all of them are in the low nanosecond. And it depends on the CPU, right? Whether you have 1.2 nanoseconds there and maybe 5 or 8 nanoseconds there or something like that. Depends on the CPU. Because it's very much depending on what kind of CPU you have. And whether you have an Intel CPU or a CPU by Apple or whatever. So this depends. Some of them don't have a third level cache. So it very much depends. And the sizes might be very small. So some of them have sizes first level cache 1 megabyte or 4 megabytes. So that's an order of magnitude smaller than the gigabytes that you have in a RAM. But these are not terabytes, right? So these are gigabytes still. So if you have a database that doesn't reside in RAM. So the database usually resides on disk. So then we have also disk. And basically nowadays we have two different disk technologies. The first one is flash memory, which are the modern ones. And the other one are the magnetic memory, which are the older disks. Or the hard drives that actually, that there are some you can hear and some you can't. But depending on what kind of laptop you have, they either have a disk built in or they have a flash memory based disk built in. And it depends on what you have. So let's write it down. So either you have an SSD or you have a hard drive. And before that, in the ancient times, there were even larger storages, which were tape drives, right? Which were large tapes of magnetic tape where everything was stored. And they're still around, but not used so much anymore. They're more for archiving purposes nowadays. Okay. So if you have SSDs, they are significantly faster than hard drives. And so accessing data on an SSD might cost you about, well, let's see, depending on how it's connected to your computer, whether it's directly on the PCI eBus or whether it's via USB. But it's in the microsecond area. So let's say 10 to 100 microseconds or 1 to 100 microseconds, depending on where you are. So that's approximately the time it takes to access data on an SSD drive. And the large ones that you can actually afford nowadays are approximately 1 terabyte in size. So unless you invest a lot, so maybe a terabyte SSD might cost you about 200 euros. So if you want to have larger ones, then you have to invest. A hard drive in the 200 euro range will have about 20 terabytes. So they will have about 20 terabytes. And the access time for a hard drive, if you want to have a specific data, will be about, well, let's say the really fast ones are four. And the smaller, the slower one will be about 4 to 20 milliseconds until you get your data. Okay, now, what you can see is we have several orders of magnitude between data access on the various storage systems that you have. And if your storage system resides on the internet, you have the latency that it takes to actually start the connection to the internet. And this latency is something you can usually measure if you're doing, I don't know, data transfer rates. And it's also in the milliseconds nowadays. So if you have a very good internet storage, so internet, so network, that's in the, depending on where you are, let's say in the 10 to 100 millisecond area. And, well, network storage you can have in exabytes size. So, which is a factor of a million bigger than a terabyte. So there's petabytes and there's exabytes. So you can have these things approximately. Okay. Well, as you can see, and of course, then you have another thing, which is data transfer rates. So how much data can you get in one go from, but we won't go into that too much. But these are orders of magnitude and difference, right? And so if you have an algorithm that is ultra fast, like doing, can do everything in log n time, which is nice, but has to access the hard drive 10 times. And you have an algorithm that is not order of log n, but maybe order of n time, and has to access the RAM a thousand times. So accessing the RAM a thousand times costs you 50 microseconds, while accessing the disk only once costs you four milliseconds, which is a factor of 4,000 slower. Right? So even if you have a slow algorithm, that access is RAM very often, but disk very rarely, you are much better off than when you have a very fast algorithm that has to do a disk access every time. Okay. Now we have to think about what disk access actually means. And so we need to understand how such a disk actually works. And it doesn't matter whether the disk is an SSD or whether the disk is a hard drive or whether the disk is the network. Because most of them, sorry, most of them more or less work the same time. So let's think about hard drives because there you can imagine how the mechanics work, right? So what does a hard drive look like? A hard drive is basically a disk or not a disk, but it's a stack of disks that have plates of magnetic material. And these plates of magnetic material rotate, usually rotate fast, which is something you can see. Who of you has an external hard drive where you do backups or so? No, yeah, you. Okay. Have you ever, when it's connected to your computer, have you ever picked it up and tried to move it? And what happens? Well, it not only vibrates, but if you try to turn it, you can feel that when you try to turn it, it moves in a different direction. Yeah. That's because the disk is spinning very fast. And so that's, oh, what's the term in English? Well, yeah, it's a gyroscope effect, but I'm looking for the physical quantity that's called the disk. That's conserved, which is called Drehimpuls in German, which is called, oh, stupid. Well, let me see. I'm quite sure when I find it, I'm... Okay, what happens? Where's my Leo? Rotational, what's it called? Oh, yeah, angular momentum, stupid. Yeah. So angular momentum is conserved. And such a disk has a very high angular momentum because it spins very fast. So how fast do they spin? Well, they spin approximately the ones that you can buy for the laptops, the external ones spin with about 4,500 rounds per minute. So they're quite fast. They're really large disk drives in server hardware. They can spin up to 20,000 revolutions per minute. So they're really fast. But this doesn't matter. Even if they're very fast, they're also approximately of that size. So you can see that it already takes several milliseconds going around once. Right? And so actually you have to wait an average half a rotation period until you can access the data. And at the same time, it's organized in cylinders of data, which is done by moving an arm, which is the magnetic reader radially. So you radially move an arm and then you move it to the right cylinder and then you wait until the data comes by. And the idea is once the data is there, we don't stop to just read that one data point. But what we usually do is we read a whole block of data from the disk, which is really a part of the whole cylinder at the same time. And blocks on disk maybe are, depending on the disk, between one and 16 kilobytes or megabytes even in size. So you read a whole block of data from the disk and store it in memory because once you're there, reading is fast. You can transfer, I don't know, 300 megabytes a second from disk to storage. But finding it first is slow. And so disk access usually works in large chunks of data. The same is true for SSD or for the network. So once you've established the Internet connection, it doesn't make a big difference whether you just read one data point or whether you read maybe half a gigabyte of data. This doesn't make a huge lot of difference because data transfer is fast. If you're on a fast network, you have a gigabit or 10 gigabits per second. Right. So it takes 100 milliseconds to actually get there. But then reading a gigabyte of data only takes another second, which is a good idea not to spend too many hundred millisecond connections, but to spend one connection and then transfer all the data you can find there in one large chunk. So, and this is also done for disks, right? So, but this changes how you access data fundamentally because it takes a long time to find something, but then to read everything that is around the data is very fast compared to that. So that means that if you have to organize huge amounts of data, you more or less have to think about how to organize it on your external storage so that accessing it is fast. Right. Because the access times are the stuff that actually stops the data, stops your algorithms, right? It's not the quality of the algorithm that stops the algorithm. It's more the amount of time it takes to access its data. So you have to organize the data properly. And interestingly, the guy who invented the red black trees also invented the B trees. And of course, his surname starts with B. Never mind. Of course, it wasn't chosen like that. But doesn't matter. He gave computer science the two most used tree data structures nowadays. So let's talk about the B trees. A B tree is a generalization of a binary tree. So it's a tree that stores sorted data, but it's no longer a binary tree. So B tree is a tree where every node can have many children. Right. So it's a multi-children tree. And actually, it's a tree where the number of children is not even fixed in every layer. So what is the advantage of a B tree? Well, the advantage of a B tree is that you can actually store a whole block of keys at the same time. Because a node is much bigger, it not only contains one key, but it contains a large block of keys that can be stored at the same time. So many modern file systems that are used to store data on a hard drive or databases that are used to store data in a database and so on a hard drive actually organized using B trees. So we've seen that a binary tree and accessing and every operation on a binary tree works in order of log n time. But we've proved that they work in order of log n time by doing a two-step proof. Right. We proved first that they work in order of the height of the tree. And then we proved that the tree is order of log n in height because we balanced it. The same is true for B trees. So all the algorithms for B trees work in order of the height of the B tree. But since a B tree can have many, many more children in every node, the height usually is much shallower than for a binary tree. Because if you have 1,000 children for every node, then of course the height, if you want to store 1,024 data points, then the height is at most two. And even mostly one. While on a binary tree, the height is already 10. Right. So everything is still logarithmic, but the base of the logarithm is no longer two, but the base of the logarithm might be 1,000. And having B trees with 1,000 children is not unusual. Right. So B trees can be very, very wide and very, very shallow. So, and what is also important is that B trees don't have the same number of children at every node. So this is how a hard drive is working. Right. So those are the tracks and the cylinders are all the tracks that are on top of each other because the arms don't move independently. That's a collection of arms that access the upper part and the lower part of all the spindles at the same time. And they read and write. And so this is how, what a hard drive, a typical hard drive looks like. And this is what a typical B tree looks like. And this is what the typical setup of the algorithm looks like. Right. So if you analyze your algorithm, you have to do, you have to think about what it means to actually access a data point. And usually that means you access a data point. In order to access it, you have to read it from disk first. And the disk read is an operation that takes a lot of time. So you have to account for it. And then you change something in the data structure, which you usually do in RAM. And then you write the data back to disk in order to make sure that whenever this part of the memory that you're working with is discarded again, the data is back on the disk. And so you have a disk read operation, you have a disk write operation. But they differ fundamentally. So why does the disk write and the disk read operation, why do they differ fundamentally? Well, the disk read operation is something you have to do immediately if you want to access your data in your algorithm. Right. So if you want to find something and do something with it, you have to read the data from the disk immediately unless it's already in memory. Right. But you can do the write whenever the disk has nothing to do. So usually you can delay the write while you do something else. So the disk write operation is something that is usually done asynchronously. Asynchronously means at some time that is not bound to when you are. Right. So most of you nowadays communicate asynchronously. Why? Because they're using Instagram or WhatsApp messages. So you send them now, the guys send them to, read them later. Until. So phone calls are synchronous calls because both of you have to be at the phone at the same time. So that's the main difference in also in disk reads. Right. So if you want to know something and you want to know it now, you have to make a phone call. If you can wait for something to be delivered, then you can send a message, which is basically a disk write. The disk write is a message that can be read later. It shouldn't be read too late because if a computer crashes and you haven't written it to the disk, you have a problem. But it doesn't have to be immediately. But if you want to know something, you have to do it immediately, which means disk reads are usually synchronous operations, while disk writes are usually asynchronous operations, depending on how you organize these things. Anyway, the point is that B-trees are organized in such a way that at least all the operations that you have to do on the tree itself can be done largely in memory by reading a big block of data. So usually they are organized in such a way that the keys fill a whole block of data so that you can read. If you want to access one key, you access the whole block, the whole node of the B-tree in one go. And then you can do whatever you want. And that means if the data is nearby, you can access all of these elements in the B-tree at the same time, because you only read in one big chunk of data. So if you're doing something in the neighborhood of that data, the data will already be in memory and you don't have to do another disk access. Okay, so this is the idea of B-trees. So you organize data that is close to each other so that they reside in the same block of data on the disk. So that when you read in a disk block, you don't only read in the one data point, but you read in all the data that is in proximity of the data that you're reading so that other parts of the algorithm then can run fully in memory. And you don't have to reaccess the disk all the time. So this is the reason why B-trees are more or less shallow. And so a typical B-tree then looks like this, right? So it has a lot of children. And so how is a B-tree organized? A B-tree has a parameter, which is basically the node size. And the node size says what is the minimum number of keys that are actually stored there and what is the maximum number of keys that are stored there. The maximum number is usually twice the minimum number. So you store things in a B-tree between the minimum and the maximum number, twice the minimum number. And then you have n keys and n plus 1 children. Right? And how does it work? Well, the keys are sorted by size. So in a B-tree, a B-tree is a generalization of a... This is so stupid. So B-tree is a generalization of a binary tree in that it satisfies the following additional requirements. So when we have the keys in this node, so we have key 1 to key n, what they are sorted. So we have key 1 is smaller than key 2 is smaller and smaller than key n. And then we have children. Right? So we have child 0, child 1 to child n. And all the keys, all the keys in child 0 are smaller or equal than key 1. Then here, they are smaller than child 1, then they are smaller or equal than key 2. Then they are smaller than child 3, smaller or equal to k3. Until we are at kn, which is smaller than cn. Right? So all the keys, all the keys that are stored in the sub-tree starting at c0 are guaranteed to have keys that are smaller or equal, or depending which the smaller is, that are bounded by key 1. And all the children in the sub-tree c1 are between key 1 and key 2. And all the children in sub-tree 3 are between k2 and k3. And all the children in the last sub-tree are bigger than the last key. So therefore, all the keys in one node of the B-tree still segment all the sub-trees like a binary tree does. So a binary tree is just a B-tree with only one key. Right? Because that separates the left and the right sub-tree. And so these segment the sub-trees by the keys. And this is true whenever it propagates down. So search operations work the same way. The only thing if we're doing a search operation, we don't have a single comparison. But we do have to do a binary search within the number of keys to know which sub-tree to go down. And a binary search is of course an operation that takes its time. It's a logarithmic operation. It's not just a single comparison, but it's a logarithmic operation on all the keys. But it works in memory, which means it's very fast. Even if we do a linear search there, which is slower, that would take only a little time compared to reading a new block from disk. And so just think if we have a thousand children, if we have a thousand children at every node, then if we want to organize a terabyte of data and every data block is only a byte in size, the B-tree will only have a depth of four. And usually the root is always in memory. So we keep the root in memory. So that means we only have three disk accesses. Even if we want to search something in a database that is a terabyte in size. And usually data blocks contain more stuff than just a byte. So usually if a data storage part is maybe a hundred bytes in size, then you can organize hundreds of terabytes in that way. Right? So this is the idea of B-trees. And now what we want to do is we want to think how we can actually organize these B-trees and how we can actually, what is the property of B-trees and how do we algorithmically work with them. So how do we insert nodes in B-trees? How do we remove nodes from B-trees and things like that? And you will meet B-trees whenever you do data science very often. Right? So as I said, they are probably the most important data structure nowadays in large data science. So disk file systems are organized using B-trees like ReiserFS, I think is a B-plus tree and for Linux. I don't know what NTFS is using. I don't think. But many database indices are B-trees and things like that. There is something which is called the B-plus tree. And the B-plus tree is actually a B-tree that stores the data that are connected to the keys in the leaves. So the nodes only contain keys and the leaves contain the data. This is called the B-plus tree. This is a variant of the B-tree which is very often used to storing data. So let's look at this. So what are the properties of B-trees that we are talking about? Well, the first property of a B-tree is that every node has a number of keys, a fixed number of keys, which is known at the node. So every node has a number of stored keys. So this is the first thing that is known. And the keys are sorted. That's what I wrote down here. The keys are sorted, are totally ordered. And every node knows whether it's a leaf. Every node knows whether it is a leaf of the tree. So this is the first property of a B-tree. The second property is every internal node of the tree has N plus one children. Cj. So j equals zero to N. The other thing that we've already written down here is that three, every key, every key in the sub-tree rooted at child. C i. Every key in the sub-tree rooted at child. C i satisfies that the key is between C. C i. That K satisfies that K i is smaller equal, the key K is smaller or equal depending at the key K i plus one. C i. So the fourth important thing, and this is what is important in a B-tree. C i will see, all leaves have the same height or level. Not all the leaves have the same depth. So the tree is balanced when you go from top to the bottom. So this is the important things. And all inner nodes have between T and 2T, so all interior nodes have a lower bound and an upper bound on the number of keys they store. So have between T minus 1 and 2T minus 1 keys. Where T is a parameter of the B tree. So that's a fixed parameter that I choose in the beginning. So either T is equal to 2 or 1 or T is equal to 1,000. So when T is equal to 1,000, the number of keys is between 1,000 and 2,000 minus 1. So 999 and 1,999. So if you have T equals to 2, then you can either have one child or you can have... No, either you have one... Sorry. Either you have one key or you have two keys or you have three keys. Meaning that you either have two children or you have three children or you have four children. So T equals to 2. If you have... So this is basically... That's a 2, 3, 4 key. That's a 2, 3, 4 T. So for T equals to 2, we have a 2, 3, 4 B tree or 2, 3, 4 T, which has either two, three or four children on every node. In every node. So this is what a B tree looks like. And tomorrow we will talk about how to organize a B tree. Like how to build it. How to search for data in a B tree. How to delete nodes from a B tree. How to insert nodes in a B tree. How to keep it up to date. So this will be tomorrow's lecture content. And so wish you a nice afternoon. See you again tomorrow. Welcome. Welcome.
