Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Test. Be loud. Okay, so finally, computer is ready. We are currently discussing divide and conquer algorithms. And last time we have introduced the divide and conquer, the simple divide and conquer method for multiplying two matrices. And we've seen that basically, well, we've not improved it, but I told you that basically the new algorithm that we were talking about is not faster than the simple triple loop to multiply two matrices with each other. However, there is a better method for doing that. So actually, and this is something we will look at in a moment, which is Strassen's algorithm. I give you an idea how Strassen's algorithm works. So we've seen that the standard divide and conquer way to multiply two matrices is just by subdividing the matrices into four smaller sub matrices, then computing all the necessary products that are required, which are eight. And then adding them up properly so that at the end we get the product of the full matrix. And we've seen that the recursive formula for multiplying two matrices in that subdivision way is eight times t of n over two plus some constant term that is used for dividing and for bringing them back together. So we got new devices. We got new devices. I wouldn't have had to get them because apparently they have been supplied already. Well, didn't know that. Okay, great. Now, let's think about a method to get it faster, which is Strassen's algorithm for multiplying two matrices. Algorithm for matrix multiplication. Okay, so what is the idea of that method? The idea of that method is that we can, there is some dependency within these eight matrices, right? Because in these eight matrix products, we use the same matrix more than once, the same sub matrix. So I write down again. So we had the matrix C11, C12, C21, C22. And we had that this was equal to C11 plus A11 times B21 plus A21. Ah, sorry, B21 plus A21 times B21. And here we had C21 plus A21 times B21 plus A22 times B21. And the final one was C21. And the final one was C22 plus A21 times B22. Okay, right? So this was the result that we had last time. And as we can see, there are several matrices that appear more than once. Well, every matrix in there, every sub matrix of A and B appears more than once. So here we have A11, here we have A11, here we have A21, here we have A21. And here we have A22, A22, A12, A12, A12, right? And the same is true for the other matrices. But what we can see is that none of the product appears more than once, right? So we cannot get rid of a product because all the products are the same. Now, if matrices were numbers, we could use tricks of the following idea. So we could use something like, you know that X minus Y times X plus Y is the same as X squared minus Y squared, right? So we could easily get this formula, which is a square. It is a multiplication. A square is basically a multiplication. So this has one subtraction and two multiplications. This has two, an addition, a subtraction, which is basically an addition, and one multiplication. For numbers nowadays, this doesn't make a difference, right? Modern CPUs can multiply floating point numbers in the same time when they can add them, basically. In former times, multiplication was much more expensive than addition, but this is no longer the case, so we don't have to care about that. However, for matrices, this does make a huge difference. Because for matrices, usually addition is order of N squared because you have to add N squared numbers because this is done component-wise, right? Because you add the first component to the first, the second to the second, and there is N squared components, so it's a factor of N squared. But multiplication by now is a factor of N cubed, which is, as we've seen in the exercises class, at least in mine, the others have not done, but probably you've already calculated the table. So, this does make a difference between the time it takes. So, now, let's see. For matrices, however, this is not true. This is not true. Why is it not true? If we look closely at this product, if x and y were matrices, let's write them down as matrices, so x minus y times x plus y. So, what do we get? We get x times x is x squared, right? Then we get minus y times x. Then we get x times y. And again, we get minus y times minus y is minus y squared. And so, what we can see is for matrices, this formula is wrong. Because matrices are not commutative when you multiply them. x times y and y times x are two different matrices, so they don't cancel out like numbers. So, this trick doesn't work so simply. So, you cannot do it so simple, right? By the way, there's an error in the book because it uses the formula to argue that it could be done with matrices, but it can't. So, anyway, so what we need to do is we need to get a bit more clever and Strassen got a bit more clever. And so, what he did, he did the following. So, whenever we have these matrices A11, A12 and so on, he produces 10 sums or differences. So, S1 is B12 minus B22. And as you can see, this only works if B12 and B22 have the same structure. So, both of them have to be square, which means that the subdivision has to go exactly through the middle. Because otherwise, the B21 matrix and B12 matrix would be rectangular and you couldn't even form the difference. So, Strassen's algorithm is more complicated than what I'm presenting. This is only true for even matrices that can be split exactly. So, S2 is the same with matrices A, but with a sum. It's A11 plus A12. Then we have the matrix S3 and S3 is A21 plus A22. The matrix S3 is B21 minus B11. The matrix S5 is A11 plus A22. The matrix S6 is B21 plus B22. The matrix S7 is A12 minus A22. The matrix S8 is B21 plus B21. The matrix S9 is A11 minus A21. The matrix S7 is B21 plus B21. Okay, nice. So, this was the first part. Now, calculating all of these things is theta of n squared. Because they are n squared numbers, so we have theta of n squared. Well, actually, it's theta of n over 2 squared because all of them are… But theta of n over 2 squared is n squared over 4. And since we don't care about constants, we can still keep it with theta of n squared, right? So, this is the… Okay, now, this was the first part. The second part is now we need to produce a few products. Okay, so which products do we use? And the idea is here we took eight products. So, we want to get rid of some products. So, the idea is to only take seven. So, this is what Strassen is calculating. So, we take seven products, which are the matrices P1 to P7. This is A11 times S1. P2 is S2 times B22. P3 is S3 times B11. P4 is A22 times S4. P5 is S5 times S6. P5 is S5 times S6. P6 is also a product of two S's. This is S7 times S8. P5 is S7. And P7 is S9 times S10. Okay, now, these are the products that are calculated. Now, we can look at what that actually is mathematically. Now, let's multiply S1 from the left by A11. So, this is A11 times B12 minus A11 times B22. Right? Now, let's multiply S2 by B22, which is A11 times B22 minus A12 times B22. P3 is A11 times B11. Okay, now A22 times S4 is A22 times B21 minus A22 times B11. And now we have to take the complicated ones, which are S5 times S6. And, as you can see, what is the idea is all the matrices that involve A's are multiplied from the left. And all the matrices that involve B's are multiplied from the right so that we don't spoil the commutativity problems. Okay, now, let's calculate S5 times S6. Well, this is A11 times B11 plus A22 times B11 plus A11 times B22 plus A22 times B22. Okay, now, let's calculate S6. Okay, what is S7 times S8? Okay, what is S7 times S8? This is A12 times B21. A12 times B21 minus A22 times B21. A12 times B21. And the final one is S9 times S7. A12 times S7 at 9 times S7 at 9 times S10, which is A11 B21 minus A21 B21 plus A21 B21 plus A21 B12. Okay, nice. So, those are the seven products we calculate. And then, we need to update our, so here, somehow, that was the preparation, that was the divide step. The divide step took theta of n squared operations. This is the multiplication step, so this is the subdivision step, right? So, we have to take seven products that are only half the size. Yes? Okay. And then, never mind. I just make this up. Okay, now, what do we calculate at the end? So, what is the combined algorithm? The combined algorithm takes C11 and updates it as the old C11 plus P5 plus P4 plus P5 plus P4 minus P2 plus P6. Okay? Okay. Okay. Then, we have C12, that is the old C12 plus P1 plus P2. Then, we have C21 is the old C21 plus P3 plus P4. And the final operation is the C21 plus P2. And the final operation is the C22 update. The C22 update takes C22, of course, the old C22 and adds P5 plus P1 minus P3 minus P7. Okay. So, if you look at that, this is again additions and subtractions of matrices as before, of half-size matrices. But these are again only theta of n squared operations. Right? Because it's additions and matrices. Now, let's figure out whether the calculation itself is correct. Now, let's look at P5 plus P4 so we can ignore the Cs, right? We only need to calculate what P5 plus P4 minus P2 plus P6 is. So, let's look at what P5 plus P5 plus P4 minus P2 plus P6. Yes. Let me see. P6 is wrong? Maybe. I check. A1, 2. This is S7 times S8. Yeah, maybe. Let me see. I probably looked at the wrong thing. A11 times P21 minus A22 times P21 plus A12 times P22. Yeah. There's a path. A22 times P21. Yeah. at the at the at the at the at the at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at plus a11 b11 plus a22 b11 plus a11 b22 plus a22 b22. So this was b5. Now we need to add p4 which is a22 plus b21 minus a22 times b11. Now we have to subtract b2 which is minus a11 b22 minus a12 b22. And then we have to add p6 which is a lot plus a12 b21 minus a22 b21 plus a12 b22 minus a22 b22. Okay let's see. So here we have an a11 times b11 which is okay. Then we have an a22 times b22 a22 times b11 and disappears here again. So those two cancel. Then we have an a11 b22 a11 b22. These two cancel as well. Then we have an a22 times b22 which is there. So those two cancel. Then we have an a22 times b21 a22 which is this and this cancels again. So the only thing that remains is a11 times b11 plus a12 times b21 which is what is standing here. So the first one is correct. Now let's look at the next one. The next one is shorter so we only have to calculate p1 plus p2. So p1 plus p2. So p1 plus p2. This is the same as a11 b12 minus a11 b22 minus a11 b22 minus a11 b22. So a11 b22 plus a11 b22 plus a11 b22 plus a12 b22. So a11 b22 plus a11 b22. Those two cancel and this is what is over there. So p1 plus p2 is the correct thing. Now let's calculate p3 plus p4. p3 plus p4 is somewhat the same. So we can write it. So this is a21 b11 plus a22 b11 plus a22 b21 minus a22 b11. So those cancel again. So those cancel again and the rest is what is needed over there. And so we have to do the final calculation and the final calculation is this one. So we need to calculate p5 plus p1 minus p3 minus p7. And this is a11 b11 plus a11 b11 plus a11 b11 plus a11 b22. So we have to subtract a11 b12 plus a11 b12. So we have to subtract a11 b12 minus a11 b12. at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the subtract P4, which is over no P7, right? I just I was wondering, I just took the wrong one. We have to subtract P7, so this is minus A11B11 plus A21B11 minus A11B12 plus A21B12. So this is again a lot of terms, so let's see. A11B11 has to cancel and the second one is there. Now A22 times B11 has to cancel as well, which is here. So then we have A11 times B22, they are here. Then we have A11 times B12, this is here. And so there is A21 times B11 and here, so the result is A21 times B12 plus A22 times B22, which is what we need here, right? So everything cancels properly and we finished. Now let's calculate the recursion of what we had, right? So Strassens algorithm for size N takes, so T of N is how many products of size N over 2 did we calculate? We calculated 7. So this is 7 times T of N over 2 plus the division and the combination steps. both of them are theta of N squared plus the theta of N squared. So now let's compare that to what we had before, which is written up there, which is the ordinary, that the simple subdivision method took 8 products of size N over 2, but only theta of 1 as only a constant amount. So apparently what you can see is that the factor in front of the recursion is more important in many ways than the addition that is done in every step, right? And if you think about what I said, what the effort of that one is, the effort of that one is order of N cubed. The effort of that one is order of N to the LG of 7. The binary logarithm of 7. Who can tell me what the binary logarithm of 8 is? 3. So apparently this here has something to do with the factor in front. Apparently, right? Okay, great. Now, that's the question. The question is, is this true? Is this the stuff that is connected to the factor? Well, not trivially apparently, because we had another important algorithm that was, I write it down again, if you remember, merge sort, right? Merge sort had also quite a similar thing. Merge sort had something like 2t, N over 2, plus something that was linear. And if it would be true that only the factor in front of the recursion matters, then this would be N to the LG of 2. But what is the LG of 2? It's 1. But this is not linear. What we know is that this is order of NLGN, right? So there has to be something hidden. It's not so trivial to say things, to say that. Okay, let's see. What is hidden behind that? And in order to know what is hidden behind that, we have to find a way how we can analyze such recursive methods, right? So we need to figure out how to solve recursive formulas of this kind. And this is the next subject that we're going to discuss. So how to solve recursive, how to solve recursions of that form. There are basically three methods to do so. Three methods. And the first and the second method are basically a way how to... No, not a way how to... If you have an oracle that tells you what the solution might be, right? Then you can use the first method. The second method gives you an insight how you might get the oracle to work. And the third method tells you a mathematical way to solve recursions that have exactly that structure. Okay? Which is the so-called master theorem. And because this is called a master recursion. And the first thing is the so-called substitution method. And saying substitution method is a very fancy way to say just prove it by induction. Because this is an induction thing to do. So just prove it by induction. And so the first thing what you have to do is basically you have to guess what the solution is. That's your oracle. So an oracle tells you what the solution might be. That's step one in the substitution method. Step two in the substitution method is use induction. So mathematically induction. at the at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at Let's round this down plus theta of n because that's essentially what you can do. Now, what do we think? We assume, we guess that t of n is order of nLgn. So this is what we guess. Now let's prove that. Usually you have to do two things. You have to show that it is true for the induction start, and you have to show that it is true for the n. So what does that mean, t of n is capital O of n log n? So this is the same as saying that t of n is smaller or equal c times nLgn for some c. Right? And it's very important, it's really important that the induction hypothesis, so the hypothesis that you state, must not contain theta's or O's or anything like that. Why? Because these equalities are not equalities as we've discussed. Right? So if you say t of n is equal to capital O of n squared or something like that, this is not an equality. This is an implicit inequality. And you have to write it as this implicit inequality. Otherwise, what you prove will most likely be wrong. Yeah? So this is one of the biggest pitfalls is to use O's or thetas in the assumption. Okay? Just replace the assumptions by the mathematical statement. So there is a c, there is a c1, there is a c2, such that these inequalities are true. It's important, really. Also do it in the exam. If I ask you to prove something like that, I'd probably give you a hint and say prove it by induction. If you use the capital O notation, this will be wrong, even if the rest of the calculation is correct. It will be wrong. All the problem will be wrong. Okay? It's important not to do that. Okay. So, because that shows that you haven't understood what the method is about. Okay? In contrast to where we make a calculation error. Okay. So, let's prove that. Now, we first show that, of course, n0 is 1. This is what we know. So what we want to show is that this is true for everything that is bigger than n0 and then we need to show that it's true for n0. Let's see. So what do we have? We have t of n is the same as 2 times t of n over 2 plus theta of n. Okay? You can use the theta of n0. Okay? You can use the theta in the calculation. That's not wrong. You cannot use it in the hypothesis. Okay? Never use it in the hypothesis. Okay? So, what does that tell you? Now we can, and that's why it's called substitution method. What you can do now is you can substitute your assumption into the method. So, this is why we have t of n. So, this is why we have t of n. So, this is therefore smaller than, um, sorry, smaller than, um, sorry, smaller than, um, sorry, sorry, smaller than c times n over 2 times the lg of n over 2, right? This is the hypothesis plus some Theta of n. Okay, now this therefore is smaller equal logarithm is a monotonically increasing function. And so this is smaller equals 2 times c times n over 2 times the logarithm, the binary logarithm of n over 2 plus Theta of n. So you can get rid of the round down, right? If you want to get rid of a round up, you can just add one. Okay, now this is equal, now the two cancels, this is equal c times n. Now, what is the logarithm of n over 2? This is the logarithm of n minus the logarithm of 2. And this is a plus Theta of n, right? Now, cn minus logarithm of 2 is a Theta of n. Because logarithm of 2 is a constant, c is a constant. And so this only involves constants. So by the calculation rules that we can say this is equal to c times nLg n plus Theta of n. Actually, what is important, well, let's write it down. This is minus c times lg2 times n plus Theta of n, right? So this Theta of n also involves a constant. So what you need to make sure is that this constant here and these constants here somehow match, right? So you cannot get the constant to be. So this is how you could determine the constant, right? So what do you have to have? You have to have that the n0. So the first n you're talking about. So this is asymptotic anyway. So the first n0 you're talking about has to be so big that this constant that is in here minus c times lg2 times n is still bigger than 0. So choose, so this is smaller or equal to c times nLg n. And that means choose c and n0 large enough. You always have to make sure that it is possible that if you absorb this order of n term into this Theta of n term, that you can choose the constants large enough. And this is what you wanted to show, right? So the assumption was that this is correct and you showed that this is correct. So therefore, the inductive step works. Now, the question is, can you do it in the beginning, right? And so what is important? You need a beginning statement, right? And the beginning statement involves two and three because you have an even and an odd number that then go to one. And so what you can do is you can take c at least as big as the maximum of the running time of two and the running time of three, which are constants because there's constant size, right? And so if you take that then t of two is smaller or equal c and this is smaller than two log two times c. Because they're greater equal. So this solves the beginning and this proves that t of n is indeed a capital O of nLgN. Okay, now let's move that up, put that down. That one down as well. This is dangerous. A pitfall for unsuspecting presenters. Okay, now. How do you make good guesses? Well, this is really difficult. Usually, you can make good guesses if you've analyzed a lot of these algorithms already. And have a good idea or have made tests and have tried to figure out what the apps that the real running times are. This is a possibility to get a good guess. The other ones is you check whether your recursion looks similar to what you've seen or somebody else has seen before. All right. So for example, I said that what happens if you have a round up thing? If you have a round up thing, you can replace this somehow by plus one. And so the question is what happens if you have something like t of n is 2 times t of n over 2 plus 12 or something like that plus a theta of n squared. Or let's keep a theta of n. Let's not make this too complicated. So the question is how does this work, right? And so some of the ideas you can get is you are interested in asymptotic behavior. Asymptotic behavior usually means large n's, right? So the point is if n is 10 million, right? Then it doesn't really matter whether this is 5 million or 5 million and 17. So a good guess would be that the 12 doesn't play a role. And that in reality, this is still nLGN. Why? Because the 2 times t over 2 is an nLGN. And so it's very likely this is also the case because the difference in large numbers is negligible. So this is a possibility to guess, right? So this is the idea. If you have a theta of n squared there, if we say something like t of n is 2 times n over 2 plus a theta of n squared, the question is can you use the same reasoning there? And what would you expect from the recursion? The recursion would tell you, well, this looks very much like what we had before. So it's likely if it's something like t, 2 times t over n over 2, it should be something like nLGN. But somehow this seems to conflict a bit with this term here because this term is a theta of n squared and n squared is bigger than nLGN. So it's very likely that this won't work. So what could we guess? Well, the point is in some sense, it sounds like we have maybe an nLGN through the recursion, but the theta of n squared in every single pre and post production phase, so to say. It's likely that this term now dominates. It's likely that the recursion doesn't play such a large role, but more the stuff you have to do before and after the recursion. So it's likely maybe, so this might be a guess, that t of n might be something like capital O of n squared. So we can see that and if yes, then let's try to prove that. Okay. So this is how you could guess these things. Now, there's one thing about these proofs and let's look at the other case that we had. So, let's see if we have t of n is 2 times t n over 2 plus theta of 1. Okay. So, if with the theta of n, this is nLGN, this is also very likely nLGN, right? So this should also be, t of n should also be of order of nLGN, right? Because this even plays less of a role than the theta of n we had before. And so, let's try to prove that one. Let's try to prove that one. So what is our guess? Our guess is that t of n is smaller or equal c times nLGN. Okay. Let's do the substitution method again. Now, what do we have? We have t of n is equal to 2 times t n over 2 plus a theta of 1. So, this should be smaller or equal 2 times t times... Now, we would have to substitute this in the not t. Two times we have to substitute this in there. So, we have c times n over 2 times LGN over 2 as we had before, right? From the substitution method plus a theta of 1. Okay. Nice. As before, we know that this is equal to c times n times the LG of n minus the LG of 2 plus a theta of n. So, this is c times n LG of n minus c times n times LG of 2 plus a theta of 1. So, the point is now that it is somehow non-trivial to get this term absorbed into that term. Because this contains an n, which this one doesn't. And now there are two possibilities to get rid of that. Well, the first thing is, you can say, well, this is a positive function, this is a positive function, this is a negative function. So, this is clearly smaller or equal c times n LG of n plus theta of 1. But this is not what you want. Because the theta of 1 is annoying because you want to get rid of that theta of 1. Because you want to prove that it is smaller or equal c times n LG of n, right? And so, there is a trick that you can use in order to get rid of that one. And the trick you can use is what you say is that t of n is smaller or equal c times n LG of n minus d. So, sorry. Sorry. Sorry. What am I doing? What am I doing? I'm somewhat stupid. I'm stupid because I didn't want to prove that at all. I'm sorry about that. Just forget it. It's if I sometimes talking and sometimes talking and explaining and thinking at the same time is difficult. And it gets more and more difficult the older you get. So, this is anyway true. But what I want to prove. So, this is true that it's order of n LG of n. But this is not the best estimate you can get. Because in that case it's order of n. So, this is in reality order of n. And not order of n LG of n. And so, I was talking about too much about logarithms. So, let me correct that. Okay. It's true that it's n LG of n. But we can do better. We can do better. And I want to tell, I want to prove that it's actually even order of n. So, let's have a look. And as you can see, this is probably nice. We talked about the binary logarithm of 2 before. Right? And we talked about the binary logarithm of 2. And you said correctly that the binary logarithm of 2 is 1. So, by the Strassen and computational idea we would have had before is that if we have a 2 in front, then the order should be 1. But in that case, up there it isn't. There we have an n log n. But there, if we replace the θ of n by θ of 1, currently we got what we assumed. That the order is n. Right? So, this somehow seems to have to do with that term as well. Right? So, if the term is small enough, it seems to be that what we guessed before by the logarithm idea, by the binary logarithm idea, was correct. But only since there was an n out there, it seems to spoil the n stuff. Right? So, this is what we actually want to prove. Now, if we want to prove that this one, we have the same problem as before. The same problem as before is that if we just assume that t of n is small or equal c times n, we get a problem with the term, the θ term. Right? Because the θ term doesn't cancel out. So, let's write this down. So, the idea is we add something here. We add a minus d. So, what we want to prove is that t of n is small or equal c of n minus d. So, what changes is that we get the minus d here as well. So, we have a c times n over 2 minus d. Right? Which is then an additional minus d here. And so, what we can do now, we have a minus 2d here. Which is nice because we can split this minus 2d into parts. Which is a c plus a theta of 1 minus d. And if d is large enough, larger than that constant, this will be negative. Which means that this is small or equal c n minus d. If d is large enough. Right? So, this will cancel out the constant. So, this is the idea. If things don't, if you can't get away, if this can't get away, then what you need to do is you need to add a term of lower order up there. Which doesn't matter because this is also an order of 1. So, it doesn't matter because of the sum theorem we had yesterday. And so, by that way you can cancel out the theta terms that are unwilling or the order of something terms that are unwilling. This is adding a term of lower order in order to properly prove something. That is. Okay. Great. Now, the next method for getting an idea of how these things behave is the so-called recursion tree method. So, second, the recursion tree method. Recursion tree method. So, the recursion tree method is a method that allows you to get an idea of what might be true. Usually, it's easier to prove things by mathematical induction, what we did before. But the recursion tree method gives you an idea on how to count stuff. So, let's take another example so that we have something new. So, let's say we want to show the recursion. T of n is 3 times t times t of n over 4 plus the theta of n squared. Right? This is significantly different from what we had before so that it's difficult to guess what might be the result. So, that's the first time. So, the idea is, of course, we split the problem into three sub-problems that have only a quarter of the size. Right? And then, the splitting and combining operation take theta of n squared time. Now, let's see how we can do that. And I don't want to paint the recursion tree. So, what we're going to do is we're going to put it up on the blackboard again, on the Beamer again. Okay, yeah. So, let's move the blackboard down. What is that? Okay. I probably have to switch to this one so that you can see what actually is presented and let's make this bigger. Okay. So, now, what is the recursion tree method? The recursion tree method is the idea you just paint your tree. Okay? You draw your tree. So, what happens? The first one is the first step, right? You have effort, c of n squared. Yes? Ah, the light, yeah, of course. Okay. So, if you look at A, at the first part, this is just the first step. The first step takes a constant times n squared, or at most a constant times n squared operations, to split it into three subtrees, and every one of these subtrees takes a quarter of the size, right? Okay, now let's take the second split. The second split is on the right-hand side. So, what we do? We split each of these three subproblems again into three subproblems, and during splitting and combination, we spend c times n over 4 squared. And we get nine subproblems, all of which have size n over 16. And then we continue splitting until all of the problems are small enough so that in the end we only take theta of one time. Now, what do we need to do? We need to sum up all the effort it takes to solve the splitting and combination steps. And then we have to count the number of leaves that are there in the end, right? So, let's move this up a bit so that we can see everything. Now, how many... What is the effort of all of these things? Well, of course, what we have is we have to count the number of nodes in every split. Well, the nodes are tripled in every split. So, it's three to the depth three to the power of the depth of the tree, right? So, we have three problems in the beginning. Then we have three squared problems. Then three cubed problems and so on. What is the effort it takes? The effort it takes is c times n over 4, c times n over 4 squared, c times n over 4 cubed and so on. So, in every single thing what we have is we have 3 over 4 squared times n squared effort. So, this is the effort in every single... In every single step. So, in the first step, k is equal to 0. So, before we start the split, after the first split, k is equal to 1. Then k will be equal to 2 and so on. So, we have this effort, sum k equals 0 to sum n. This will we have to determine. So, how deep is the tree, right? So, now how often do we have to split? So, what will be the size of the problem? The size of the problem is n divided by 4 to the k, right? Because in the first time it's n over 4. In the second time it's n over 4 squared. So, this is the size of the problem. So, this is the size of the problem. In level k of the tree is n divided by 4 to the k. Okay, we do this until we are 1. We are approximately 1. So, when is this smaller equal to 1? So, this is something we can easily calculate. That means that 4 to the k has to be greater equal to n. Now, we can take the logarithm of both sides. So, this means k is greater equal to the logarithm of base 4 of n. Okay, great. But that means that we take logarithm 4n steps in the subdivision, right? Okay, great. Now, what is the number of problems that we have at the bottom? It's 3. So, the number of problems in level k is 3 to the k, right? There's 1, then there's 3, then there's 3 squared, and so on. 3 to the k. So, the number of leaves of the tree, that means number of leaves of the tree is 3 to the log 4 of n. Okay, now, we need to figure out what this number is. Okay, so, let's do it simple and let's restructure that and let's figure out what 3 is. Now, let's get it as powers of 4, right? So, what is 3? 3 is 4 to the log 4 of 3, right? So, that means that 3 to the log 4 of n is 4 to the log 4 of 3 to the power of log 4 of n. So, we can calculate powers by multiplying them. So, this is 4 to the log 4 of n times the log 4 of 3. And now, we do the same the other way around. So, because 4 to the log 4 of n is actually n, which is n to the log 4 of 3. So, that means that 3 to the log 4 of n is n to the log 4 of 3. And so, now, let's sum up all the effort we have to take. So, the effort we have to take is some constant, let's call it, because it is theta of 1. So, the leaves do a work of c of d times n to the log 4 of 3 plus and the rest is the sum. So, this is the sum of k equals 0, 2 and up to where do we have to go? We have to go until k is the log 4 of n, right? This is the number of leaves, number of steps we take. And here we have 3 over 4 to the k times n squared. Okay, now, let's calculate that sum. Well, how do we calculate that sum? We can factor out the n squared. We can look at it like this because the n squared doesn't depend on k. And so, this is a geometric sum. And so, we know the formula for geometric sum, right? The formula for geometric sum is 1 minus 3 over 4 to this one, this is log 4 of n plus 1 divided by 1 minus 3 over 4, which is 1 over 4. Okay, great. Now, we can do the same trick as before, right? With this here. And this is times n squared. But this is smaller equal 1 divided by 1 over 4, which is 4 times n squared. Because this only subtracts something. And what it subtracts doesn't matter because we can replace it by the infinite sum if we want to. So, at the end, what we have is that this is smaller equal d times n log 4, 3 plus 4 n squared. Okay, so, what is the result? Well, what is log 4, 3? It's definitely not a square because the square would be 16, log 4, 16. And so, this is order of n squared. So, the effort of this algorithm is order of n squared, right? So, this is how it works with the tree method. The nice thing about the tree method is that it also allows you to do splits that are not even. So, let's look at the following example, which is t of n. New example. We have t of n is t of n over 3 plus t of 2n over 3 plus an f-thurt of order theta of n. This is a split into two sub-problems. One has size n third and one has size 2n third, which is basically splitting it uneven in a third part and a two-third part. And so, you might be wondering why one would want to do that. But there are algorithms in, for example, global optimization that do exactly splits like that. Direct, for example. And there is a reason for that. Sometimes you also take golden sections to subdivide things into two. And you know that golden sections are also unsymmetric. So, there are algorithms that use that for some other reason. But still, in order to compute the effort, let's look at the tree again. Okay? Let's look at the tree again. That's why I didn't turn off the beamer. And so, what we can see is a very similar tree. So, we start with the effort of the split, which is order of theta of n. So, it's a constant times n, basically. And then we have a size of order n over 3 and the size of 2n over 3. And this will be subdivided again. And what we can see, of course, is that in the next row, we have three different problem sizes, right? We have n over 9. We have 2n over 9 twice. And we have 4n over 9. And in the next subdivision, that will be worse. Because we have a tree that becomes more and more unbalanced. Because the leftmost part will shrink much smaller than the rightmost part. Because the rightmost part will shrink with 2 over 3. While the rest, the left side part, will shrink with 1 over 3. And the ones in the middle will somehow mix up the products that we have between 1s and 2s. So, all of them, of course, will be powers of 2. But they will be different powers of 2. On the left-hand side, we will always have 1, so 2 to the 0. On the right-hand side, we will always have 2 to the k. But in the middle, we will have several that have different powers of 2. And so, the question is, how do we analyze such a tree, right? Of course, what we can see is that in that case, it's simple to see that all the subdivisions always add up to 1. And so, if we subdivide them, it will always add up to 1. So, all of the efforts in all of the roles will always be c times n. Because the subdivisions always add up to 1. So, this is simple. So, there is the simple thing. And so, we know that the depth of the tree will be relevant times n. Right? So, the depth of the tree will be relevant times n. So, what do we have to do? We have to figure out how many splits we had to make in the end to get to the leaves. In that case, it's very simple. Why? Because we know that in every length, so how many leaves do we get, we do know that the size of the leaves are the same. Right? But all the leaves have to add up to the size of the problem at the end. Because in every split, we don't get rid of the problem size. So, we will have n leaves at the end. Right? Because also, they have to add up to n. And so, we have n leaves with the theta of n. So, the only thing we have to figure out is how deep the tree gets. But this is the same idea as before. Right? We split it into parts. And the parts that are versed, the depth of the tree is the versed on the right-hand side, which is 2 ninths, 2 thirds to the n. We'll have to exceed n at the end. And so, it's again a logarithm. It's the same calculation as before. So, we have the depth of the tree is a logarithm. Again, the logarithm of something, maybe logarithm of 2. But logarithms only differ by constants. So, it doesn't matter which logarithm we're taking in reality. And so, we have the depth of the tree times the effort that every single row takes. The effort that every single row takes is n, a calculation of n. The depth of the tree is a logarithm of n. So, the overall effort in the ranks is n times the logarithm of n. And then we add another theta of n for the leaves, which is smaller than the n log n. So, the effort there is also n log n. So, this is basically the idea. If you want to have a detailed understanding again, just read through the section in the book. It's explained even more profoundly. But we don't have the time to explain really everything. So, now let's get rid of the... Let's get rid of that and let's shut this off and let's... Let's get rid of... Let's get rid of that from the Blackboard. Okay. So, what we do now is we're going to the next method, which is the so-called Master Theorem. The Master Theorem is a mathematical... an analytical method to solve these types of recurrences. And... By the way, just a question. Are you already past integrals in analysis or are you still before integrals in analysis? Hmm? Past integrals. Very well. That helps a lot. Because that allows me to... I'm going to also take... Okay. This is a bad one. This is... This is... So old that the rubber is already quite stiff. Okay. Now... Let's take the final method, which is the... Master theorem, the so-called Master theorem. This is all that the rubber is already quite stiff. Okay, now let's take the final method, which is the master theorem, the so-called master theorem. The master theorem is theorem 4.1. And I will write it down today, explain it a bit, and we will prove it next time. And this is one of the theorems that might be for the exam. So let a be bigger than zero and let b be bigger than one, both real numbers. Let f be a function that maps n to r, the so-called driving function. Now, if the recurrence, if t satisfies the recurrence, t is equal to a times t of n over b plus f. Plus f of n. Right? Then where or t of n is equal to a prime times t of n over b. Round it down plus a double prime times t of n over b. Round it up plus f of n with a prime plus a double prime is equal to a. Okay, so one of these recursions. Then the following is true. First, if there exists a constant epsilon. a constant epsilon bigger than zero such that f is capital O to the logarithm of base B of A minus epsilon then t of n is capital O of n log Ba. Actually, it's theta of n log Ba. Okay, the second one is if there exists a k greater or equal to zero, such that f of n is theta of n to the log B of A times LG to the k of n. This is the power of LG to the k, the kth power of that. So, t of n is also theta of nLg log Bn, this is a B, log Ba times LG k plus 1 of n. And there is the third possibility. The third possibility is if there exists a k plus 1 of n. A positive constant epsilon such that the k is equal to zero. So, the third possibility is if there exists a positive constant epsilon such that the k is equal to zero. f of n log B of n log B of A plus epsilon. at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at at the at at the at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at and in addition, f of n, sorry, a times f of n over b is small or equal c times f of n for some constant c, then our t of n, c small one, yeah, c, sorry, c between 0 and 1, then t of n is theta of f of n. So this is the so-called master theorem, and it tells you why all of these things end up as they are. Okay? So if this f of n is the watershed function, so this, they know this n, we call n to the log b of a, the watershed function. Why? Because it distinguishes between the three cases. So if f of n grows, as grows less than the watershed function by some polynomial growth rate, yeah, then the watershed function is the limit of the recursion. If the difference between the watershed function and f is some logarithmic power, then the logarithmic power shows up again in the effort of the recursion, just with the power one more, which is the reason why we had, in our case, we had b and a was in the merge, a merge sort, b and a were both two, so this was one, but k was zero because f of n was theta of n, theta of n to the one, which is a k of equal to zero here, which produces a k plus one here, and that's why it's n log n. This is the reason for why the log n appears in the merge sort. And if the f of n grows at least polynomially faster than the watershed function, then the result is the driving function. The driving function then dominates and the recursion doesn't play a role anymore. Then the effort of the driving function dominates. And, of course, the driving function has to satisfy things so that the recursion anyway doesn't go out of hand. So this is basically driving function cannot grow too fast. And then, and this is the point, so this is the point of the master theorem. We'll prove it next time and we'll take a few applications in the problem sessions as well. So have a nice afternoon. Thank you. Hmm.
