to the lecture course, final sprints, until we finish the course next week. So, yes, last time, in the end of the last lesson, we started to talk about algorithms solving the minimum spanning tree problem. And we had basically two algorithms that I presented, but I didn't explain them anymore because there was no time left. And those two algorithms were Kruzka's algorithm and Primm's algorithm. And most of today's lecture will be using the book. So, let's start to turn on the projector. If it turns on. Now it works. So, in a second, yeah, so very, very soon we will see the algorithm, how it works. So, just to get back to Kruzka's algorithm, here is written. So, as you remember, we have given a graph, and we want to find the smallest spanning tree. What is a spanning tree? A spanning tree is a subgraph that contains all the original vertices, but does not contain any cycles. So, the idea was, for example, if you have a utility company that has a number of customers and a number of possible connections that can be built between houses, for example, gas lines, power lines, whatever. And every one of these lines has a weight. For example, time for production or usually cost, of course. And we want to have the minimum weight tree that is actually solving the problem. And Kruzka's algorithm is one of the possibilities to solve that problem to find a spanning tree with the minimum total weight. And so, how does it work? Let's look at the algorithm. The idea of the algorithm is that we basically use the optimal subproblem property, right? So, the optimal subproblem property was that whenever we have an optimal minimum spanning tree and we take a subgraph, then among these vertices that we've selected for the subgraph, the subtree will also be a minimum spanning tree. And so, the idea of Kruzka is we start with forests, right? So, with disconnected trees, and we want to unify them together step by step until we have removed all of the non-connectivity between all of the trees, until we've connected all of the trees to one big tree. Why is this nice? Well, the point is that in the beginning, of course, if we assign a tree to each and every node, then they're, of course, optimal, right? Because there are only one point. And so, we have a lot of very, very small one point optimal spanning trees for all of the one vertex subgraphs. And then we start to combine them together to get minimum spanning trees among all of these subgraphs. And, of course, the first and non-beatable minimum spanning tree among all of those is the one that contains the edge with the lowest weight. Right? So, if we take the minimum edge and we connect them, then we have one node trees and one two node trees. And, of course, this two node tree is a minimum spanning tree for these two nodes because it contains the minimum possible edge rate. And that's what we continue. So, Kuskart's algorithm actually considers all of the edges of the graph one by one sorted by minimum. And then adds those edges to the graph. Of course, this doesn't work because sometimes, if you want to add an edge, you actually produce a circle, which is something you don't want. So, you have to ignore all of the edges while building the tree out of the forests. That would introduce a cycle because we need an acyclic graph to be a tree, right? And so, this is what the algorithm is doing when we are in seven. So, what is the sets? Well, it manages sets. The algorithm manages sets of vertices. And these sets of vertices contain the trees, right? So, you have as many sets as you have currently trees in your forest. So, in the beginning, all of the sets, all of the vertices are in singleton sets all by themselves. Once you find a new edge and connect two trees, then all of the vertices in both of these trees are in the new bigger tree. So, this is the union operation up there. And find set just checks which set a vertex is in. And if the vertices are in the same tree, then of course, you cannot connect them, right? Because then you automatically introduce a cycle. If they are in two different trees, then the two trees are still disconnected. And so, if you connect them, you get a new graph which is connected, does not contain a cycle. Because I cannot introduce a cycle between two sets with a single edge, right? So, we would have to go back. So, this is the idea of Kuzkowski's algorithm. And this is what it does. So, what it actually does is it initializes the final tree as the empty set. So, the final tree doesn't contain anything. And then it produces a set for each vertex. That's what I said. It makes a set out of each single vertex. And then it creates a list of the edges that is monotonically sorted increasingly by weight. And then that's the main part of the algorithm are the four lines between six and nine. So, we're going, as I said, through every edge starting with the one which has the smallest weight. And then it just checks whether they're in different trees. That's what Find Set is doing. It finds the set that contains U. And it finds the set that contains V. And if these two sets are different, i.e., if these belong to different current trees in the forest, we add the edge U, V to our tree. And we replace our sets U and V by the union of U and V. And then we return by the union of these two sets. And then we return at the end, we return our graph A. Actually, we could speed up the problem a bit because we would already. So, this is what a good count. Well, this is what a good implementation of Cusco's algorithm is doing. It counts the number of vertices that are already in the tree. Because if you know the number of vertices that are already in the tree, if you've exhausted all of the vertices, you don't have to continue anymore. You don't have to continue looking for more edges if all your vertices are already in the tree because then you've already found the minimum spanning tree. So, this is usually something that's being added to the Cusco algorithm. So, if you look at that, the blue edges are the ones that are added to the minimum spanning tree in every step. And those are also the ones that are actually contained in the set. So, the red arrow points to the edge that is currently considered. So, let's look at the graph. And the minimum weight edge is the edge with weight one between G and H. And so, at the beginning, we have all disconnected trees, trivial trees that only contain a single vertex. And then we find the minimum edge between two of the trees, which is the tree H and the tree G. So, we add this edge to our tree. And then we produce the union of G and H. Then we look for the next edge. The next edge is the edge 2 between G and F. And there's another one between I and C, right? So, let's look at this edge, I and C. So, we look at what are the sets that belong to where I belongs to, which is still a singleton. The set to which C belongs is also still a singleton. So, the edge is safe to add. And so, we add the edge 2 to the tree. And as we can see in the beginning, the tree is disconnected, right? So, we have now two sets less. So, we've replaced the set H and the set G, but a set containing G and H. And also the same for I and C. So, we replaced the set C, the set I, with the set IC. And the next edge that we consider is the next 2. And the next 2 edge is the one between G and F. And so, we again check whether the sets are disjoint. And they are because F is still a singleton. And the set GH is disjoint from it. So, we can safely add the edge and get a large set now, FGH. So, you can see the number of connected components in these forests, right, reduces by one. Because we always connect two until then disconnected trees to get a new tree. And so, the graph, the tree in the graph gets connected more and more. And the next edge is the edge, for example, with weight 4. Weight 4 edge, we've seen this a lot of time now, connects A and B. And so, the trees are now the tree AB, the tree IC, the tree FGH, then the tree E, and the tree D, right? So, the number of sets now has shrunk to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And we want to look at the next edge. The next edge, by chance, is the next 4, which still runs between this joint set. So, the set CI and the set FGH. And, of course, we can add it. So, we connect these two and get one tree less. Like, we have now AB. We have this tree, which is also a subgraph that doesn't contain a cycle. And that's Singleton's D and E still. Okay, the next weight edge is 6. And here, we have the first time when a minimum weight edge is not safe to add. Why? Because the set containing I and the set containing G are actually the same, right? Because they are in the same tree. And so, we cannot add this edge because we would introduce a cycle. We can see that. So, we ignore the edge. The next edge will be the edge 7, which is up there. And this does connect a new vertex to the tree, which is the T. And so on, right? So, the next is the next 7, which is this one. But this, again, runs between two edges of the same tree. So, we don't add it. And so, we continue from there. We also cannot add the edge. We can add the next edge 8, right? So, now we have only two trees in our forest. The first tree is the one which contains all the edges but E. And the other is E. And so, we can continue looking at the edges. We can't add the 8. But then we have a 9. We can add the 9. And here, we could stop because now we have a single set that contains all the edges of the original graph. And that would tell us that the spanning tree is finished, right? So, we could break the loop here. But here in the algorithm, as it's written in the book, we just continue through the end, the rest of the edges, which none of them can be added because they would introduce cycles. So, this is how Kuskal's algorithm works. There is another one. There is another algorithm, which is Priem's algorithm. And Priem's algorithm looks like that. So, Priem's algorithm produces a, uses a min priority queue. So, it remembers two things for every node. The key in the priority queue, which is the minimal edge, the minimum weight of any edge that connects the current node to any other node in the tree. To another node in the tree, right? So, well, every node can be connected to many other nodes in the tree. And the key in there contains the smallest weight of all the edges connecting this node to the tree. And so, if the node is not yet connected to the tree, the key is infinity, which is actually what is initialized in the beginning loop, right? In the first three lines, we initialize the data structure for every vertex. And since none of these are yet connected to the tree, we set the key to infinity and u.py is the parent in the tree, right? So, we also add nil for the parent. So, in contrast to Kuskal's algorithm that actually uses a forest that is being grown together by letting the various trees in the forest grow to be a large single tree, Kuskal's algorithm works differently. It starts with a vertex and then grows the tree from there by adding branches, so to speak. And how is this done? Well, it's done by using a min-priority cue. Remember min-priority cues that we've been implementing already during our algorithm classes, also in the exercises class. So, Q is a min-priority cue using the key that we are actually initializing here. So, we start with a node R. The node R is the starting node. And its key is zero, right? Because it's already connected to other nodes in the tree. And so, we start with zero. And then we initialize the cue and add every vertex to the cue, which is actually quite simple in the beginning because we could initialize the cue as we want because all the keys are the same, which are infinity except for the first one, which is the root, which has key zero, which is the first node to be extracted. Anyway, so initializing the cue is trivial, so we don't have to do the initialization step that we usually do for a heap, for example. Right? We've implemented min-priority cues using heaps. And we know how to initialize a heap. And we know that initializing a heap usually uses n log n steps because it's a sorting, more or less, type thing. And this is not necessary here because we already know that all the keys are the same. So, we don't spend n log n time here for initializing the cue. Okay. Then, we produce, while the cue is not empty, we take the minimum from the cue. And then we're looking through the adjacency, so the neighborhood of you. So, we look through all the keys, all the vertices that are adjacent to the node that we read. And then, whenever we have a new edge, so we look at all the edges and we look at the weight of the edges. And whenever the new edge that we're considering is smaller than the key that we've already... Remember, the key gives you the minimum edge weight that connects a node to the graph. So, if you find a better edge, then we add it. Right. So, we replace the key by the weight of this new edge. And we remember that the parent of our node V is actually U. So, that's where we came from. And then, we change the key of our node V to the new key in our priority cue. Right. So, we update the priority cue, the min priority cue with the new key. And we remember from our discussion of min priority cues that these are two of the operations that such a min priority cue actually supports, which is inserting a new element and decreasing one of the keys in the min priority cue to update the cue. So, to re-sort the cue. So, how does Prim's algorithm actually work on the same graph? Well, let's see. So, we start with the root node, which is A in our case. And then, we look at its neighbors. And its neighbors are P and H, as we can see. And, of course, it's greedy. It's a greedy algorithm. So, what we basically do, we look through all the neighbors. And then, we take the neighbor that has the lowest, the edge with the lowest weight to connect B. And so, the edge with the lowest weight here is four. And so, we connect A to B. And then, hop with our attention to B. Well, let's look at B's neighborhood. B's neighborhood contains H, A, and C. But A is already gone because A is already in the tree. And so, the only two things that remain are C and H. And the minimum weight between B and the neighbor is the 8 that connects B to C. So, we grow our tree towards C and hop with our attention to C. And we continue from there, right? We look at the neighbors of C again. Looking at the neighbors of C, well, the one that has the minimum weight edge neighborhood is I. And so, we hop from C to I. Then, we consider I as our new neighborhood. Do we? Well, actually, no. What is actually the weight with the... What is the node with the smallest key? Well, if we look at all the nodes in the graph, the node with the smallest key is still C. Because the 4 edge that is here is still the smallest edge connecting anything to neighbors, which is the edge 4, right? So, we add F afterwards. And then, the next neighbor of F has weight 2, which is G, right? So, then we grow our tree towards G. And here, the neighboring smallest is 1, which is the H here. So, we grow from G to H. And then, we again have to check for all of the nodes and the smallest weight. And we're back to C, right? Because 7 is now the smallest weight edge, which connects ourselves to D. And then, there's only one left, basically, because we only have 9 and 14. And so, 14 is actually not choosable as an edge. And so, we connect via the 9 weight edge. We connect D to E. And we see that we have the same spanning tree as before. So, usually, spanning trees are not necessarily unique, right? You can have many spanning trees that have the same weight. But, and it's unclear whether Kruz, Karl, and Prim's algorithm actually find the same one, if there are more than one. But both of them will find a minimum spanning tree. So, the one hops step by step from, adds a new edge to the tree in every step and grows the tree to, at the end, connect all of the nodes. And Kruz, Karl's algorithm, as I said, uses a forest of tree and lets them grow together. So, those are the... So, basically, if the number of edges is the same. So, Kruz, Karl's algorithm and Prim's algorithm usually have the same. So, Prim's algorithm is E, the order of E plus V log V running time. So, Kruz, Karl's algorithm is order of E log V. And the point is, asymptotically, they are more or less the same. So, we have... Oh, come on. Okay. Doesn't want to go out. So, Prim's algorithm has order of V log V plus E log E running time. And so, this is the running time of Kruz, Karl's algorithm. And most of it is done by doing extract min. All calls to extract min have a running time of V log V. So, wait, let me... Right. So, what did I want to say? Yeah, yeah, wait. I think that was it. Anyway. I wanted to say what Kruz, Karl's algorithm. This was Kruz, Karl. Algorithm. Has a running time of E log V. And so, what you can see is that the log V is always large. The question now is, which algorithm is better for which application? Well, usually, E, the number of edges, is larger than the number of vertices. Well, why? Because, well, it doesn't have to be, but usually it is. The graph has to be connected to have a spanning tree. If the graph is disconnected, it doesn't have a spanning tree because we cannot find a connected subgraph of a disconnected graph. So, the graph at least has to have roughly as many edges as vertices, right? So, V log V and E log V are approximately the same. But if the graph is very dense, the graph is very dense, then, of course, E might be large. The number of elements. So, E is the number of entries, of edges that are actually in there. What you can do is, what we do know, is that log E is the same size of log V. So, this is actually the same as O of E plus V log E. Ah, log V. On the other hand, if we look at the graph, then usually E might be larger. Worst case quadratic in the number of vertices, right? So, usually the second algorithm is a bit better than the first one. Depends on the implementation. Asymptotically, they are basically the same. If you use something which is called a Fibonacci heap, which we didn't talk about. So, if you use a Fibonacci heap, which is actually something that can be used to speed up Prim's algorithm, then Prim's algorithm reduces to order of E plus V log V. And this, then, is better than Kruskal's version because we don't multiply the E by the log of V. So, if we have a lot of edges, then using a Fibonacci heap makes Kruskal's algorithm faster than Kruskal's algorithm. Okay. So, that was what I wanted to tell you actually about. That's what I wanted to tell you about spanning trees. Okay. So, let's continue with the next problem class. Next problem class is single source shortest path problems. And it's also very famous because that's what all the routing planners use. Whenever you use Google Maps or any other routing algorithm, they solve for you a single source shortest path problem. So, what is behind a single source shortest path problem? Well, first, you start with a directed graph. You want to drive from what's called Nordkap, which is in Norway, to, what is it? It's, well, let's say Kapstadt, which is very close to the southernmost point in Africa, which is still reachable by car. So, you can, if you start in Nordkap, which is the northernmost part in Europe, and you use a car, you can go to the southernmost part, point of Africa without swimming. So, that's the largest, the longest drive that you can take from the north to the south. Not really, because you could actually start in the northernmost point of Asia, which is in Russia, which is, I can't remember how it's called, some cup in Russia, which is even further north than the Nordkap. So, this is one of the largest north-south connections that you can do on the Eurasian continent, Eurasian-African connected part. I don't know whether this is further than when you go from the northernmost point of Canada to the southernmost point of Chile. That might be longer. I have no idea. But anyway, if you put this into Google Maps, it still finds the fastest road very, very fast. So, you can wait for it, right? And the question is, how does it do that? Because what you could do, of course, when you start by looking for the shortest path, is you could use all the paths that go through the whole connected road network from the Nordkap to the southernmost part of Africa. And you could go through all of these paths and, at the end, take the one with smallest weight, right? But the number of paths between two points in a map is enormous, right? So, you cannot possibly go through all of the paths. But they still end up giving you the optimal solution, so the best possible route. Good. Now, that means, so if we drive per car, we do know that there are one-way streets. So, two points can be connected in one direction, but not in the other. So, because of one-way streets, so we have a directed graph. So, we start with a directed graph, and then we give an edge weight again. So, what are possible edge weights? Well, one possible edge weight is distance. Google Maps, of course, uses time. So, what is the weight in time that it takes you from point A to point B? And so, you have a large, very, very large graph, which is directed, and every single edge in the directed graph has a weight. And what you want to find is you find the path from a point A to a point B using the minimal total weight on the edges. And the idea, well, all of these together is about single-source sorted paths. Single-source means you start from a fixed point, right? So, you start from a fixed point, which is, in that case, not cup, and you want to go somewhere else. And the single-source shortest path problem actually takes a single-source point and finds the shortest route to every other vertex in your graph. Okay? So, that's the point. It finds the shortest route to every other vertex in the graph. And so, it also finds the shortest route to the vertex you're interested in, which is the southernmost part of Africa. Well, of course, we do know what a weighted graph by now is. We've discussed this already last time. And we have variants of the single-source sorted path problem. And the four variations are, of course, the thing that is the other way around, which is the single-destination shortest path problem. Which is basically the same as the single-source sorted path problem on the transposed graph. Right? So, you end somewhere, which is just turning around all the vertices and solving the single-source shortest path problem, which is really the same thing. What actually you're interested in when you're using Google Maps is you're not interested in a single-source shortest path problem because you don't want to know from the Nord Cup to how long it takes to every single other possible destination in your graph. You're only interested in a specific destination, which is, in our case, the southernmost point in Africa, which is the so-called single-pair shortest path problem. Right? So, you take node A, node B, and you want to find the shortest route from A to B, which is the single-pair shortest path problem. And then an extension of that is the so-called all-pair sorted paths problem, which finds the shortest route between any two points on your graph. And this is something we will not discuss in the lecture course. It's in chapter 23 in the book. But we will discuss the single-source shortest path problem here. And among them, the most famous algorithm, which is actually invariance used nowadays in almost all routing planners, which is Dijkstra's algorithm. Okay. Okay. So, what is the important thing? And the important thing, again, is that the single-source shortest path problem has the optimal subproblem structure. So, we always have these things. So, if we have a shortest path from A to B, and we look at two vertices on this path, and we consider the shortest path between these two vertices, then this is the same as the section of the shortest path between A and B. So, if we have two points A and B, we have two points A and B, and we have the shortest path between A and B, right? And we have two vertices on this path, which is U and V. So, if we have two points A and B, then this section of the shortest path between A and B is the shortest path between U and V. Well, this is trivial, because if there would be a shorter path between U and V, we could also use that together with the path from A to U and the path from V to B to get a shorter path between A and B. And this would be a contradiction, right? Because we already said that we are on the shortest path between A and B. So, if we are on the shortest path between A and B, we cannot have a shorter path between U and V, because otherwise we could make the path between A and B also shorter. So, this is quite trivial to see, right? And so, the single-source shortest path problem has some sort of optimal subproblem structure. So, whenever we have an optimal solution, it also solves the optimality problem between all of the intermediate vertices as well. And this is something we can use, actually. So, what we can use is the fact that we can grow shortest paths starting from our source node. Actually, we've already seen that we can do something like shortest paths. If you think back two lessons, three lessons, probably something like that, we've discussed breadth-first search, right? And breadth-first search basically found the shortest number of hops that it takes from the source node to every other node in the graph, right? So, we grew the breadth-first search out from a node in waves, right? So, we took all of the nodes that were one hop away from the beginning. Then, for every node that was one hop away, we grew all the nodes that were two hops away and so on. Then, we remembered how many hops every node is away from our original starting point. And we also grew the tree that told us from where we actually came in our breadth-first search. So, breadth-first search solves the single source shortest path problem for those graphs where all the edge weights are one, right? So, that means in principle, we already do have some sort of algorithmic idea what could work. Because breadth-first search is quite a simple algorithm. So, we would likely have to adapt that a bit. But before we can adapt that, we have to think about the very general single source shortest path problem. Now, let's abstract away from our task to find the shortest route. Because this task has a very simple property. Whenever we drive along a street from A to B, even if it's only from one intersection road, from one intersection to the next intersection, which are basically the vertices in the road network graph that we're considering, then whatever we do when we start at intersection A and go to intersection B, the time that we spend driving there will be positive, right? So, we cannot teleport there, which would take no time, and we cannot go in, I don't know. Well, infinitely fast means that we would hop there in no time, which is still non-negative, but we cannot exceed the speed of light to travel back in time. So, we will not be there before we start it. But the general weighted graph problem doesn't tell you anything about the weight. So, weights do not necessarily need to be non-negative on a general graph, right? But if we do have negative weights, we do have one problem, and this problem is, for example, that one. So, if we have, let's say, three vertices, and they are connected like this, with edge weights, let's say, two, two, and minus five, which would be feasible for a graph, then we have a problem. Because if we go from here, let's say this is our point A, which has an edge weight of four, let's see, and we want to go to B, which has an edge weight of, let's say, five or 50, whatever, you might ask yourselves, what is the shortest path from A to B? So, what is the shortest path from A to B? Yeah. So, the shortest path from A to B has weight minus infinity, or it cannot have minus infinity, because it's still a finite path, but there is none. There is no shortest path, because you can go along this circle as often as you want, and by going along the circle, you can reduce the weight of your path by one for every time you pass the circle, and such a thing is called a negative weight circle. So, negative weight cycle, and a graph containing negative weight cycles, of course, has a problem with shortest paths, because you can have paths that are arbitrarily small weight, even if they're very long, but the weight can be very, very small, and so, of course, if we consider graphs, and we want to solve the shortest path problem, we have to assume that the graph doesn't contain any negative weight cycle. So, that's the first thing. But there is another one, which is zero weight cycle. So, even if we replace the minus five by minus four, we get a zero weight cycle, which means that also we have infinitely many shortest paths, because we can also run around these cycles as often as we want, without changing anything. Of course, this is something that we can ignore, so we can get rid of this cycle just by removing all of the zero weight cycles from the graph. But what is really hurting is a negative weight cycle. Now, we will consider two algorithms for solving the single-soul shortest path problem. The first one being an algorithm that works for negative weights, and the second one is the one that does not, that does require that all the weights are positive, which is usually a good idea if you're doing route planning, because you are guaranteed that all of the edge weights are actually positive, which is Dijkstra's algorithm. So, Dijkstra's algorithm is the one that uses only positive weight. So, this is the negative weight cycle discussion. And so, where are we? Just a second. Oh, yeah. Okay, great. Now, all the methods for, well, the important methods for finding shortest paths, they use something which is called relaxation. And usually what you're doing is you're storing the distance from the source, the best distance from the source to every vertex in the graph by a number that is called D. So, V dot D in all of the algorithms is the distance from the source node to the node that we are, to the vertex that we're at. and the distance of the best path that we've found so far. Right? So, V dot D will contain the shortest distance that, of any path, so the shortest weight of any path that we've found by now. and, of course, initializing all of the algorithms at the same way is just by setting this distance to infinity because we do not even know that the graph is connected yet. And as before in the algorithm before, the pi, V dot pi contains the parent in the graph which is the previous node in the path. And, of course, the source distance to itself is zero. So, that's what we're starting with. And now, one of the most important steps in the algorithm is called relaxation. So, there are different notions of relaxation in the optimization community, but this is important. So, what is V dot D? V dot D is actually an estimate for the shortest distance to our source node. And that's the best estimate we have so far. So, that means by using the optimal substructure property, if we have a neighboring vertex that can actually reach our vertex V via a direct edge, and we know the distance, the best estimate of the distance U to our vertex V and we do know the edge weight, we can actually add to the distance of U the weight of the edge from U to V to get a new estimate of the distance of V. and so, if this is better than what we knew before, then we know that we can replace the distance by this new estimate. And this is actually what relaxation is doing. So, whenever we have our two vertices U and V and we do know the current best estimate for U distance to our source node is five and the best currently known distance from our V node to our source is nine and we do know that we have an edge of weight two connecting U and V, then we do know that we can reach V with at most seven distance, right? Because we could go from U which is distance five away by an edge that has length two to V which then would have distance seven to the source. So, this is what we call a relaxation step. So, that means that we update our distance to V by this new value seven and so, the function relax is quite trivial, right? So, you have two vertices U and V and if the distance, the best known estimate is bigger in V than what we can reach via U, so U dot D plus the weight of U V, then we just update our distance estimate in V to U dot D plus the weight of the edge from U to V and we remember that the best route to V is going through U which is we remember that the previous element in the path to V is actually our vertex U. So, this is the update operation, the important update operation. There is an LEL missing, right? So, this is also relaxed. This is not an R and then an X. That's just a typo in the book. Okay, now, the important algorithm that works for arbitrary weights is the Bellman-Ford algorithm. And as you can see, it is quite simple. As Dijkstra's algorithm is also very simple. So, this is why it can be simply implemented in, I don't know, all of the maps algorithms that you are actually downloading from the internet. so, the most difficult thing in a routing algorithm, in a routing planner, is not the algorithm to solve the problem. It is actually the data that you collect for all the roads. problem. So, this is very often the case if you're doing data science. It's usually not the most difficult thing. It's not the mathematics in solving the problem very often. It's the effort that you have to take to actually collect the data properly. So, getting the route network for most of the world is much more difficult than implementing the algorithm that solves your routing problem. implementing the idea that you can update the time whenever there is a traffic jam somewhere and things like that. So, those are the really innovative things that are in Google Maps and not the routing planning algorithm because that's something that's been solved 50 years ago. So, the first one is Bellman Fort. And Bellman Fort is an algorithm that does not require that the weights of the edges are actually non-negative. And it's a really simple idea. So, what you're actually doing is you're initializing all of the single source vertices which was the algorithm that we've seen before. So, you just set the estimate of all the nodes to infinity, all the parents or the previous steps in the path to nil and you only set the distance to the root to the beginning to zero and then you start from there. And then the only thing you have to do is you go through all of the vertices. so what you're basically doing is you take as many iterations of the algorithms as there are vertices in the graph minus one and then for every of these iterations you just go through all the edges and you check whether the connection can be updated the estimate can be updated so relax all of the edges and then whenever then you take a second loop after all of these things you take a second loop and in the second loop you check for every edge whether the distance that is doable is bigger than the distance of u.d plus the weight of u.v that basically tries to detect whether we have a negative edge so a negative weight cycle so why does this algorithm actually work and why do we have to repeat the 3 to 4 loop so often right so this is basically doing the same loop going through all the edges but it's doing it several times right it's doing it as many times as the graph has vertices minus one so it's repeating the same operation quite often so why does it have to do that well the point is what we said is that whenever we have every point every vertex in the graph has an estimate how long it takes from our source to this specific vertex right and then we check whether any of its neighbors any of its neighbors has an estimate that is small enough so that by going through the neighbor and the edge we have a shorter path than before right so that's what relax is doing it's checking among all the neighbors basically whether the estimated distance to the neighbor plus the edge rate gives us something that is better than our best estimate that we found so far okay but what can happen later is that our neighbor also gets a better estimate any of our neighbors could get a better estimate later and so we have to pass through all the edges again to check whether our neighbor has gotten a better estimate yeah and the worst thing that can happen is that we're always the last to be updated in some sense which means that all of our other vertices in the graph have to be updated before we are updated and this is why we have to take as many iterations as number of vertices in the graph minus one that's the worst case that can happen we could actually also what we could do is we could in every of these iterations and this is if we have a better implementation in every of these iterations what we can actually check we can actually take a boolean whenever our relax operation was successful and if we have taken a complete for loop three four where we have not updated a single key so a single distance then we can stop because then we will never again update the single distance so if we implement this algorithm we just have to remember whether in the loop in lines three to four the relax operation was successful once if it was never successful then we finished then we don't get better updates anymore right but the maximum number of iterations that we have to take is the number of vertices minus one and and if then there would be a relaxable edge which is what we check for in the loop between lines five and seven so line five and seven check whether there actually is still an edge left that can be relaxed that means that we would relax once too often and this can only happen if we have a negative weight cycle right because negative weight cycles would lead to infinity many updates so we would get lower and lower and lower and lower and the number of vertices minus one is the worst case that can happen so if we have to take it once more then we have a negative weight cycle and the problem is unsolvable this is why we return false in this situation so if you implement Bellman Ford you wouldn't do it like this so this is the idea the gist of the Bellman Ford algorithm what you would do is you would actually check whether relax was successful or whether relax was not successful and whenever you start the loop in lines three and four you would add a boolean so had a successful relax equals to false before you start the loop and then whenever you have a successful relax you would say that had a successful relax to true and would check in the line two four loop whether that state falls during the inner loop for each edge loop and if it stayed false then you would break the loop between two and four and stop the algorithm because then you would be finished already because all the other loops wouldn't do anything anymore right so they wouldn't update these things anymore so this is Bellman Ford which is the algorithm that can be sped up by whenever we know that all the edge weights are positive and when we know that all the edge weights are positive we would usually use Dijkstra's algorithm which is this one so this is Dijkstra's algorithm and this uses in addition to our it uses a mean priority queue again so welcome back to mean priority queues this is why we actually one of the reasons why we use them they're really really important parts of many algorithms and also Dijkstra's algorithm is using a min priority queue which is our queue there so the variable queue is a min priority queue and so as before we initialize our graph by setting all the distances to infinity all the previous nodes pi to nil and the root node distance to zero and we insert all of the vertices into our main priority queue and as before we've discussed this already so we know that all the keys are infinity except for the root key and so we don't have to really initialize the heap we can just put everything in there and just put the source node in front so we know that the first position in the heap is the smallest one so we just put the root in front and fill all the other nodes as we like and so we don't have to spend the n log n time we just initialize the whole array so to speak by all the nodes in any sequence that we deem interesting the only thing that we have to do is we have to put in the root node as the first node but this is trivial and then the real algorithm starts at line six and this basically says as long as we have not drained the queue empty we have still a vertex left and what do we do we take out the vertex u that has the minimum known distance by now from our from our source node and if you look very closely Dijkstra's algorithm has the same idea as breadth first search so Dijkstra's algorithm basically is a sort of breadth first search but is a very clever sort of breadth first search because what it's actually doing is it's not using the hop count in breadth first search but it's using the distance count in breadth first search so what it's actually doing is it also propagates so it starts from the stores and then it propagates outwards in a large wave and whenever it hits another vertex it starts away from there so this is what breadth first search is doing right so it's using it's starting from a node and then it's propagating out from that node to all the neighboring nodes and then it's starting from the neighboring nodes from all the neighboring nodes that have distance one in breadth first search and starting new wave going out to all the other nodes that have hopped to Deixner's algorithm using a very similar idea it starts from the source node and then it propagates in a distance wave outside and so if it starts from the source node the first other node it hits is actually the node that has the minimal distance from the root node and then once it found the minimum distance from the root node wave from there going to all the other nodes and then it's the first thing that's actually met is the node that has the minimum distance from the root node so the propagation outwards is not by number of hops but by real distance so this is the idea and the real distance is what we've actually stored in the dot d element this is why there is the min priority queue because the min priority queue holds the currently known distances of all of the other elements and so it always starts the next wave from that node that has the current distance of the current minimal distance to the root node node so this is what it actually does so let's look at how it works it starts by extracting the vertex with the absolute minimal distance from the root node right then it adds to the set S this new extracted vertex and then it's looking for that vertex in the adjacency list and in the adjacency list it's calling relax so it's updating all of the neighboring weights starting from that node right so it's updating all the distances it's going around through all the other nodes and if the hop through you is faster than what we had before it's just updating the new distance and whenever relax was successful so whenever we shortened the distance to a node we update the distance key in the mean priority queue of that new node right so we remember that the node is actually earlier in our wave so the v dot d records when our propagating wave actually hit our node our vertex v and actually it remembers an estimate when the wave will hit latest possible right so in the beginning all of the nodes have a time when the wave hits them of infinity because we don't yet know when the wave hits them but what happens is we start from the root node the root node has many connections to other vertices right and we do know if the wave would just start from the root node we would know when the wave would hit the other vertices because we know these distances right so let's draw it like this okay so so this is hit first from the root node that's the shortest distance and so we have an estimate for all of these nodes already we know that the wave will hit this node latest when it has passed through that edge so what could happen of course it could happen that here it's shorter why because this could be a motorway and this could be I don't know a bumpy off-road road road right which is very slow it might be short but it might be very slow and you might have a motorway which is much faster now this node is the first node to actually where the wave hits first and so what we do now is we start a new wave from that node and we know that for example we can go here here here here and maybe even here right there's a bridge or whatever so that means now we can start from that and check whether the wave going this way would hit this node earlier than the wave that goes directly in this way and it could happen and if it happens this here will be relaxed so it will have a shorter distance than what we had an estimate before and so we would update the distance key to that node with this distance in the graph right and then maybe this is the second furthest node and not let's say this one so we would start a wave from this an outward wave and this is how Dijkstra's algorithm works so there should be a yeah there we are so this is a this is a road network a very simple one and this is how Dijkstra's algorithm actually works so we start with the empty graph where the source node has distance zero and all the other nodes have distance infinity right and we start to propagate our wave from zero so what we do is we consider all the edges that start at node S and then we update the estimate when the wave would hit our vertex V and our vertex Y and of course we know that this distance is 5 this distance is 10 so it could be so latest at time 10 the node T would be hit and latest at time 5 the node Y would be hit now we can look at the minimum distance node and the minimum distance node now is Y because we've removed U from the priority queue every single step in Dijkstra's algorithm removes one vertex from the priority queue so the source is gone and now the one which has been hit first by the wave is Y now we have to check whether if the wave passes through Y we are actually faster to any of the other elements so let's see we hop to Z in two additional hops making the distance to Z at most seven we hop in nine to X making the distance to X at most 14 and we hop in three to T making the distance to T at most eight which means that the relaxation step to T was successful right so the detour over Y gets us a shorter distance to T than the direct connection from S and so we update the key of T in the priority Q to eight and we update the key to Z in the priority Q to seven and we update the key to X in the priority Q to 14 and now we again look for the note that the wave would have hit first and the wave would have hit Z first because the distance is seven and so the next thing we is the node Z and so we start away from there right so we don't have to consider any edge to any node that is already gone so we're looking for the next ones the next one is actually only X so the next distance is X and X is shorter reachable via Z which means that we update the X making it 13 and then the next node in the mean priority Q is T which has distance 8 so we start away from T well T to X is a hop of length 1 so we update X to distance 9 and well then the next node is X which is the last one and we finished and so what we get is if you look at that what we get is we get distances from the root node which is 5 for Y 7 for Z it's 8 for T and 9 for X and we also remember all of their parents so the shortest path to 5 is the direct connection from S the shortest path to T is the connection via Y the shortest path to Z is the shortest path to X is the hop via Y and T not directly from Y to X and so what we've solved at the same time is all the possible connections from the source node S to all the other nodes in the graph all the other vertices in the graph are reachable and we know how fast they're reachable right so we know time to T is 8 time to Y is 5 time to Z is 7 and time to X is 9 and this is basically a variant of breadth first search that uses the best known estimates for distances as the sequence in which we do breadth first search so the only difference of breadth first search is how we order our vertices from which we start the next search in our neighborhood and this is the introduction of this mean priority QQ that actually records what is the closest vertex to our source vertex currently so this is what the mean priority Q is doing and that is Dijkstra's algorithm and yeah I think I can discuss it and let me see should I write it to the black board okay I'll write it to the black board it's better than having it this is just too small okay so let's switch back the last thing that we do is we actually prove that Dijkstra's algorithm is correct and I need to get more light by getting fewer less light first so theorem 22.6 Dijkstra's algorithm works Dijkstra's algorithm is correct okay so what we do is that we will actually use some sort of loop invariant so whenever we have whenever we start the while loop which is the loop that actually goes through the through the the min priority queue when we go through the min priority queue what we are actually doing is whenever so remember from last time so delta from u and s is the minimal distance so it's the distance from s to u right so this is something that we actually delta su of course not us sorry so that's the distance that's what we introduced and so whenever what does what does Dijkstra's algorithm say so what is the theorem formulation so Dijkstra's algorithm algorithm run on a directed weighted graph on the weighted directed graph with non negative weights non negative weights is important and source vertex s terminates with u dot d is equal to delta su for all u in v so for every vertex we will have the shortest distance and so what the loop invariant says so the proof is basically doing a loop invariant invariant for the while loop and it says in the beginning of the while loop so at start of the while loop it basically says that for all s in s for all v in s in the set s we have that v dot d is the same as delta s v so this is what the y loop says we have this set s that where we add all the all the vertices that we've removed from the priority queue and this set contains only vertices where we have already found the minimal distance so this is the this is basically the idea so the point is that in the beginning this is trivial so if s is empty this is anyway trivial because there is no vertex in s and the first iteration extracts the root node from the priority queue and the root node has distance zero by initialization and this is of course the distance from s to s so this is the initialization of the loop so this is clear so for the initialization is zero so for the initialization phase in the loop this is true now what we have at the next time is the update phase or the maintenance phase in the loop invariant so the maintenance phase says that all the elements in the set s already have best distance so what is the algorithm actually doing in the y loop the algorithm in the y loop is actually extracting a vertex from the remaining thing so u will be in the set of vertices without the set s because that's the elements that are actually in the min priority queue now what it does in and then what it does is it replaces s by s union u so what we have to do is we have to show that at the end of the loop actually we have to prove that u dot d is equal to delta su right so this is what we have to prove okay let's see why this is the case if we don't have any path from s to u so if there is no path if there is no path s u we are finished we are finished because then since then u dot d is infinity because it's never reachable by anything else so there is never an edge from the connected graph that contains s to u so it stays at infinity and we are finished so that means if there is no path we finished if there is a path then! if there is no path is there is a path is a path if there is a path then there is a shortest path right so there is a shortest path from s to u there is a shortest path s to u right there has to be a shortest path from s to u so let y be the first vertex on the shortest path from s to u that is not in s okay so let's assume that there is a vertex on the shortest path from s to u that is not in s then this one has a predecessor on the shortest path and this one has to be index because it's the first one that is not in s right so then then it's predecessor vertex! and x could be s so there is definitely always solution because s is always on the path so x could be s and y could be not could be you but it's always a possibility Okay, now, what we do know is that the shortest path from S to Y is definitely, so we know, we know that the distance between S and Y is definitely smaller equal to the distance between S and U. Because the edge weights are all non-negative. Because the edge weights are non-negative. Right? And Y is on the shortest path before U. So we only go further. So the edge weights have to, I know I'm a bit late, but I want to finish this proof today. Okay, now, what we do know is that X is before, but X dot D is the same as delta SX. Since S, X is in S. Right? Right? But what we do know is that when we do the while loop that added X into S, the X at Y was relaxed. When X was added to S, when X was added to S, to S, X, Y was relaxed. Because this is what the loop is doing. But, therefore, Y dot D, Y dot D is now delta S Y. Because that's the best what we can get at that time. But that means that delta S Y is smaller or equal delta S U. This is something we know. This is smaller or equal U dot D because it's always bigger, can never be smaller. And U dot D is at most Y dot D. But this implies, of course, that Y dot D, but Y dot D is smaller or equal delta, no. But this implies all of these together. We know that delta S Y is the same as Y dot D. So this is the same as delta S Y. And so all of these things have to be equalities. And so this means that these two are also equal. So that U dot D is equal to delta S U. And that finishes the maintenance property of the loop. And the termination property is just the theorem. So we are finished because at the end we have gone through all of the vertices. That finishes the proof. And so Dijkstra's algorithm works and produces the minimum distance to all of these edges. And this finishes the graph theoretic things. And so have a nice afternoon. See you again tomorrow. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Thank you.
