Thank you. We have learned how to analyze recursive algorithms, and I've written down a theorem that tells you how to solve the recurrence that is connected to the... Did I? Yeah. Okay. I did start. Okay, then, which is the master theorem, right? So last time we wrote down the master theorem. It was the end of the lecture, basically, and I explained only a little bit about it. And it tells you how the amount of work you take if you consider a recursive algorithm, if you have calculated the recursion. So what is the effort of the algorithm? So usually we talk about runtime, but as I told you, you can do the same with memory. But most of the time you're interested in runtimes. And so what was the master theorem? It was theorem 4.1. Master theorem. Remember, it said the following. So you have two fixed constants. A constant A, which is positive, and a constant B, which is at least one. One of them tells you how the amount of work you take after splitting up, how much you have to spend for each subproblem, and A tells you into how many pieces you actually split it up. And what you really want to have is you get the recursion and an additional function that tells you how much work it is in every single iteration in order to split the problem into the subproblems and in order to combine the results of the subproblems to the result of the whole problem. Okay, now let's see. The driving function f of n is the function that tells you how much work it is in every iteration. And f of n, or the f, a function that maps n to the reals. The driving function. at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at least at at least at least at least at least at at least at least at at least at at least at at least at at least at at least at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at bigger than n0 and d of n is theta of 1 for n is smaller or equal to n0. Or a prime and a double prime are both positive with a prime plus a double prime is equal to a. And t of n actually satisfies that this is a prime times the floor of t of n over b plus a double prime times t of the ceiling of n over b plus f of n. If this is the case, the asymptotic behavior satisfies the asymptotic behavior of t satisfies the following three points. If we have a constant epsilon such that f of n climbs at most as fast as the watershed function. So let's write the watershed function down right away. So we define the watershed function as n to the. And now we have the logarithm with base b of a. And we raise n to that power. So this is the watershed function. That satisfies the following thing. So we define the watershed function in that. And then the question is how f of n behaves relative to the watershed function. Okay. And there are three possibilities. So the first point is case one. So if f is gross at most, no, if there exists an epsilon bigger than zero. So if we define the watershed function such that f is big O of the watershed function. And to the. B log a minus epsilon. So if this is satisfied. If this is satisfied. If this is satisfied. Then. Theta of n. Is exactly growing like the watershed function. Theta of n. Log b a. And we have the second case. The second case tells us. That f of n. Basically. Is like the watershed function. Times. Some power. Of a logarithm of n. If there is a constant. If there exists. A constant. K. Greater or equal to zero. It's important that this constant is non-negative. Such that. F of n. Is. And now. Important. So the three cases. If you look at them. They have a distinction. Right? So. In the first case. F of n. Is bounded above. By. This capital. O. N. Log. B a. Minus. Epsilon. The second case. It has to be. As a. Particle equivalent. So it has to be. A theta. Right? So the middle case. Is a theta. Of. The watershed function. Log b a. Times. Some power. Of a logarithm of n. Is. Theta. Of. And now. Again. We have the. Watershed function. N log b a. Times. A power. Of a logarithm. But the power. Is. Increased by one. As compared. To. The. A. Driving function. F. And the third case. Is. Where we only have to. Bound. F of n. Below. Asymptotically. So. In the first case. We bound. F of n. Above. Asymptotically. That basically. Means. That. The. Effort. That you have to take. On the leaves. Dominates. Everything. This is why. T of n. Is basically. The effort. That you have to take. On the leaves. Dominates. Everything. This is why. T of n. Is basically. Our theta of one. Times. The number of leaves. We get. Here. Both of them. Are somewhat. In balance. And in the third case. It's the other way round. Then the work. In the iterations. Dominates. And so. If there exists. A constant. Again. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. A constant. Epsilon. Bigger than zero. Such that. F of n. Is big. Omega of. N. To the log. B. Plus. Epsilon. Then. F. T of n. Is. Theta. Of. F. Of. F. Of. F. And basically. The driving function. Dominates. Everything. F. This is the master theorem. And as you can see. Basically. It doesn't matter. Whether. We include. Rounding. Of. Divisions. Right. So. We've. We've. Been. Talking about. If. We subdivide. For example. In Strassen's algorithm. Right. In Strassen's algorithm. I didn't specify. How it works. In the non. In the case. Where we don't have a power of two. Because. It's only a bit more complicated. Adding zeros and such. And such. But. As we've seen. In Strassen's algorithm. And also. In the sorting algorithm. Right. If we take merge sort. If we have an array. That is not an even size. Right. And we have to split it into. Only. Into not equal parts. The first one. Will be a big bigger. Or a big smaller. But. We have to split it into two different parts. And. How do we. How do we designate that? Well. We have one part. Where we take n. Divided by two. And rounded down. And with a second part. Where we divide n by two. And rounded up. Right. This is a method of splitting. An odd. Size. Error into two parts. So this is the more frequent case. Than this one. Right. But. As you can see. In the master theorem. In the. The results of the master theorem. Doesn't matter. So you can basically. Safely ignore. The. The floor and ceiling operations. There. The only thing you have to do. Is you have to sum up. These two numbers. A prime plus. A double prime. Getting your a. And then you can. Safely assume. That. The. Recursion somewhat. Looks like this. So where we only. Divide by two. Okay. And this. Lecture. This lesson. Sorry. This lesson. This lecture. Will now. Be. Dedicated to discussing. The master theorem. And. We will also prove it. But we will prove the simple version. So we will prove this version. We will not care about this one. at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at at the at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at recursion tree method, right? So we wrote down the recursion tree and counted the number of leaves and wrote down how it works in our example. And the proof works quite similar to that. But let's talk first, before we discuss the proof of the theorem, let's first discuss a bit about the method itself. So we've already seen in Strassen's algorithm that the effort we take. So let's look about Strassen's algorithm again. So what was the... So usually we don't write. So if we analyze algorithms, we usually don't write down the theta of one part, because this is somewhat always implicitly given. And we know what the basic size is. In the proof, we will use it. But when I write down recursions, I will just drop silently, usually the theta of one term. So let's see, what does Strassen's algorithm tell us? That tells us something like T of n is 7 times T of n over 2. So whenever we divide our matrix into 2, we need to calculate 7 products plus additional operations that all amount to effort, which is theta of n squared, which is adding, extracting matrices and things like that. So let's look at the master theorem. So let's look at the master theorem. So the first thing we would, of course, calculate is the watershed function. So let's look at what the watershed function is. Well, here, so the watershed function... The watershed function is n to the log b. b is 2, so we have the binary logarithm, Lg, and of a is 7. So the watershed function is n to the lg of 7. And now we have to compare the watershed function to the driving function. The driving function is theta of n squared, right? That's the driving function. So f of n is theta of n squared. And now we have to compare the two. We have to compare whether f of n is in case 1 or f of n is in case 2 or f of n is in case 3, right? So let's look. So that means basically we have to compare the watershed function to the function f of n. So we need to figure out whether, does there exist an epsilon bigger than 0 such that theta of n squared is capital O of n to the Lg of 7 minus epsilon. So we have to check what the Lg of 7 is. Well, the Lg of 7 is 2.81 or something like that, which means that, well, yeah, indeed, as long as we keep epsilon smaller than 0.81, this is true. So yes, since Lg of 7 is about 2.81 or something like that, which is strictly bigger than 2, so this grows faster. So that means we are in case 1. So that implies case 1 of the master theorem. And what does case 1 tell us? Case 1 tells us that t of n is theta of the watershed function. Well, the watershed function was n to the Lg of 7. And this is what I said when we analyzed Stassen's algorithm. Now, let's look at the second example that we had, which was the merge sort algorithm, right? Let's look at merge sort. Sorry, yeah? What is the merge sort of the model set function? Well, that's this coefficient, which is a, which is 7, and this number in the denominator, which is 2, which is b. So we have b is 2 and a is 7. The watershed functions n, the logarithm base b of a, which is log 2 of a. Okay, so second example is a merge sort. So in merge sort, our recursion looks like t of n is 2t of n over 2 plus a theta of n, right? So that was merge sorted. So now, let's look at our next part. So what would be the watershed function? So what is here? a is equal to 2 and b is also equal to 2, right? So what is the watershed function? The watershed function is n, again, logarithm to base 2 of 2, which is n, right? Because the logarithm base 2 of 2 is 1. So now we have to compare our function f of n with the watershed function. The function f of n is theta of n. And the watershed function is also n. So which case are we in? Well, there is definitely not an epsilon bigger than 0, such that f of n is capital O of n to the 1 minus epsilon, right? Because 1 minus epsilon is smaller than 1, so we are not in case 1. We are also not in case 3 because here we would have to have that f of n, which is theta of n, should be a big omega of n to the 1 plus epsilon. But 1 plus epsilon is bigger than 1, so this is not an asymptotic lower bound of f. So the only possibility we can have is that we are in case 2, right? Or that none of the cases apply of the master theorem because there are some gaps between the cases and there are some recursions that have the form, which cannot be solved using the master theorem. But in this case, we are theta of something because we are theta of n to the 1 times lg n to the 0. So this is theta of n times lg n to the power of 0 because the power of 0 is 1. If we raise something to 0, you get 1, so n to the lg to the 0 of n is n. So we are in case 2. That means we are in case 2. And case 2 tells us that this implies that t of n is theta of n. And now we have again have an lg of n, but we have to raise it to the power of 1, which is n lg n. What we've already determined using the substitution method, right? So this quite readily solves us most of the recursions that actually happen in practice. So this is the first step of the method of the master method. We have another one, right? We have yet another example, so let's calculate that one also. We have another one, which was the general, so the naive divide and conquer for matrix multiplication. So this also had a recursion, and the recursion sum would look like t of n is 8 times t of n over 2 plus theta of 1. Right? So this was the recursion of the naive divide and conquer algorithm. Do you have a question? Do you have a question? Okay. Okay, so let's see how we can look at that. Let's calculate the watershed function again. So what is the watershed function? Well, the watershed function is, again, what is a and what is b? So a is 8 and b is 2, meaning the watershed function is n, again, the binary logarithm of 8, which is 3. So this is n cubed. So the watershed function is n cubed. And now we need to compare our f of n. So theta of 1, we have to compare to n cubed. Now, clearly, theta of, so f of n, theta of 1 is not n to the 3 times some power of a logarithm. This is clear. And it's also not bounded above by an order of, well, yeah. So this is where we are. So this is bounded above by n cubed, right? So n cubed is much faster than theta of 1. And so what we get is case 1 again. And case 1 again tells us that t of n is theta of the watershed function. theta of 1 cubed. What is important, really important, is that you need to be able, in order to apply the master theorem, you need to be able to compare the effort it takes for you to, in every iteration. So you have to be able to compare the driving function with the watershed function in some way, in some asymptotic way. What cannot happen, for example, is that sometimes the effort you need to take in every iteration is bigger than for infinitely many iterations. For the iterations, it is bigger, it's capital O of n log BA minus epsilon. And for another part of the iteration, it's big omega of log A plus epsilon for some epsilon. So if you have half the iterations following that law and half the iterations following that law, for example, then you cannot apply the master theorem. But you also cannot apply the master theorem if these comparisons you can make, actually all of them don't work, which can happen. So let's look at the following examples. So there are gaps between 1 and 2 and 2 and 3. And 2 and 2 and between cases 2 and 3. And 2 and between cases 2 and 3. So let's look at the following iteration. Example, t of n is 2. t of n over 2 plus, and now our effort shouldn't be n log n, but n divided by lg n. Okay, then we have again, a equals 2 and b equals 2, which means the watershed function is n. As before. So the watershed function is n. And now, what we do know is that n divided by lg n is little o of n. Right? Because it grows less. So whenever we divide n divided by log n by n, we have 1 over log n. And log n goes to infinity, so 1 over log n goes to 0. So this is a zero sequence, which means that it's asymptotically negligible as compared to n. So we have a zero sequence, which is nice. So we have a zero sequence, which is nice. But the point is, and this is important, we cannot find an epsilon. So, however, however, we cannot find an epsilon that is bigger than zero, such that n divided by lg n is capital O of n to the 1 minus epsilon. Why can't we find that? Well, that would mean if we compare the two and we divide the one by the other, what we would need to have is that it is bounded. But the point is that polynomials grow or power functions grow faster than every logarithm, no matter which epsilon we have. So let's look at that and let's use our analysis skills from before. So what do we have to show? We have to show that there is a constant such that n divided by log n is actually smaller than n to the 1 minus epsilon starting from some n. So what do we have to show that n, which basically means that if we divide the two functions by each other? So just let us remember what we have. So if f of n is capital O of g of n. So what was the definition? The definition was there exists a constant, I don't know how I called it, let's call it c, such that f of n is smaller or equal times c of g of n for some n, for n large enough. So let's look at how this would work. Okay, now, that means if g of n is not zero, and let's assume so if g of n is not zero from some point, that implies that f of n divided by g of n is smaller or equal to c, right? So let's look at how this would work in our case. Well, and this is, of course, equivalent. So let's look at how this works in our case. So we have n divided by l g of n, and we would have to divide this by n to the 1 minus epsilon, right? So let's look how this works. This is a complicated fraction. So what you get is, you get n to the power of 1 minus 1 plus epsilon, so you have an n to the epsilon divided by l g of n. Now, the question is, what is the behavior of that sequence, right? So what is the behavior of that sequence? Well, what do we know? We need to calculate the limit. We need to calculate the limit. Let's try to calculate the limit of that sequence. So what is the limit of n tending to infinity of n to the epsilon divided by l g n? And l g n is just a constant times the log of n, the natural logarithm. And this is not a c, let's call it k, because it's a different constant than this one. It doesn't matter what the constant is. Something like natural logarithm of 2 or so. Okay. Now, we know from L'Hôpital's rule, right? So both of them go to infinity. Both sides go to infinity. Because epsilon is positive, so we can produce the derivative of both of the functions. So this is equal to the limit of n tending to infinity. Now, let's calculate the derivative of n to the epsilon, which is epsilon times n to the epsilon minus 1, right? And what is the derivative of the logarithm that is 1 over n? Now, that means what we get is the limit of n tending to infinity of epsilon divided by k times n to the epsilon. Because the 1 over n is getting a plus 1 in the denominator, which cancels out the minus 1 there. And that means this is infinity. This is plus infinity because the power is positive. The constants are as well. Which means that this function is not bounded because it's going to infinity, so it's not bounded. So no matter which epsilon you take, it doesn't fall into case 1. So it's not case 1. But it's also not case 2. Why? Because it's little o of n. And little o of n doesn't tell you that it is theta of n. So in case 2, it would have to be theta of n. But it's not theta of n because it's little o of n. So it's not asymptotically equivalent to n. It's something else, right? Because it goes to 0. And it's also not case 3. Because in case 3, we would have to have that it is a big omega of n plus epsilon. So let's look whether this is the case. So is it case 3? Well, it is not because the function is small o of n. Since it's small o of n, it cannot be big omega of n. These two things contradict each other. So no. Since n divided by lgn is small o of n. So it cannot be bounded below because it's getting to 0. So none of the cases apply. So for this recursion, we cannot use the master theorem at all. So if it doesn't fall into any of the three cases, we need to use another method. Like getting an idea, figuring something out. Like calculating it using the tree method or anything like that. What is the solution, by the way? What is true? So we have just that is theta of n times lg lgn. So this is the true solution of that recursion. And a function of that form doesn't appear in the master theorem. So this is not an application of the master theorem. So there are all the three cases can appear. We've done an example where case three was actually using the tree method. So this is the first step. And all the other methods we already discussed, like Strassen's algorithm, divide and conquer for sorting. So merge sort. And the naive divide and conquer for matrix multiplication. All of them can be solved with the master theorem. And most of the iterations that you actually meet during your career will be usually done using the master theorem. We had one more example, by the way, which was this imbalanced tree from last time, right? So where we split the problem into a problem of size one-third and a problem of size two-thirds, right? And this is also something where the master theorem doesn't apply. Because in the master theorem we have to have a simple recursion. So we split our problem into a sub-problems, all of which have basically the same size, right? Which all of them have size n over b. So this does not apply to recursions where we have an imbalanced split. We will do a method that tells us how to work with recursions with an imbalanced split after we prove the master theorem, which is the so-called Akrabazzi method or Akrabazzi recursions, which actually exactly talk about splitting into not equal cases. But this will be done after the master theorem. So now what we need to do is we need to prove the master theorem. And we will prove the simple one, which is the one where we readily ignore the floor and seals, which is the so-called continuous master theorem. So we'll only prove the simple version. Okay, now, how does this proof work? Proof work, to prove the master theorem. So without floor and seal operations. Okay, so we will split the problem into three steps. Three steps that are basically formulated by two lemmas and by the final proof of the theorem. The first thing will be we will ignore that n zero here. We will do the same what we've done in all our recursions by now. We will start with a base case, which is a case of size one. We will ignore that a and b have to be integers. We will just assume that a and b are any reals. And we will say that this distinction is taken. So whenever n is small or equal one, we will have theta of one. And when n is bigger than one, we will have this recursion with a and b, any numbers. So we don't care about whether these are integers or not. For the proof, it doesn't matter. Okay, so let's write the first simple version of the master theorem. So the first lemma is a simplified version of the master theorem. Okay, so the lemma is the following. So lemma four, two. Again, we start with two numbers. A bigger zero and b bigger one, as in the master theorem. And we don't care about n zero. So we will look about the following recursion. So then for n greater or equal one, we will have that t of n is equal to a times t of n divided by b plus f of n. And f of n shall be, again, a function that maps the natural numbers to the reals. So this shall be true for n greater or equal one. And t of n is theta of 1 for n between 0 and 1. Or a smaller or equal 0, actually. A greater or equal 0, so we can assume that 0 is there as well. So in this range, we will have the T of n is theta from 1. Then we will give an asymptotic formula for capital T of n. And of course, it will again involve the watershed function. So we will have a theta of n log B of A as before plus. And now we will not care about anything that is asymptotically equal, but we will really count how much additional effort we have. So we will have this plus a sum. So the sum will be from J equals 0 to the log B A rounded down. And then we will have A to the J of Fn divided by B to the J. And if you look at that expression and think about the last lesson, then you probably remember where this comes from. And we will actually really use the same idea as before. And I will project that on the blackboard so that you can look and don't have to draw the tree. So this is how the proof works. So we take the recursion tree method to prove that actually. We will now do it abstractly. So proof analyze the recursion tree. Okay, so let's look at the tree. And the first iteration, which is the top, we will have to spend F of n, right? For first deconstructing our large problem into our sub-problems and then recombining the solutions of the sub-problems back into a large problem. So we will have to spend an effort of F of n. So in the first iteration, we spend F of n. Then we subdivide a problem into a sub-problems of size F of n over B, which means we have a sub-problems of size F of n over B. And every subdivision and recombination, therefore, takes F of n over B effort. In the second iteration, or let's write in the zero iteration, because that makes things easier. In the first subdivision, we spend A times F of n over B, because we've subdivided the problem into sizes n over B, and we take A of these sub-problems, right? So let's look at what happens in the next subdivision. In the next subdivision, we split each of the A problems into A more problems, meaning that we will have A squared problems in the next iteration. In the second subdivision, we get A squared problems of sizes n over B squared. So we spend A squared times F of n over B squared. Literally, uh, effort, right? And so on and so on. So by induction, by induction, we see that in the Jth subdivision, we spend A to the J times F of n divided by B to the J. Okay, so this somehow very much looks like the sum we have here. This is the combined effort of all the, um, iterations we have to take in all this, of all the effort we have to take to subdivide the problem and recombine the problem, right? So this is where this sum is coming from. Another question is, we have to figure out how many subdivisions we have to make, and what is the effort of the final layer after we've stopped doing all the subdivisions, right? So this is what we have to make sure to get right. So today I brought this thing here, which hopefully helps to properly clean the blackboard. Let's see. I'll try my best. Let's see. Okay. Okay. Okay. Oops. Forgot the patch here. Okay. Okay. Great. Now, let's continue. Let's try to calculate how deep is the tree. So how does it work? Well, in every iteration, we split our problem into problems of size n over b. And so we know the sizes of the problem. So in the jth iteration, in the jth iteration, the problems have size n divided by b to the j. And how often do we have to subdivide? We have to subdivide until n divided by b to the j is between 0 and 1. So we stop. We stop if n divided by b to the j is smaller than 1, or small or equal 1, actually. Or small or equal 1, actually. Okay. Well, we do know that this eventually happens, right? Because b is a number that is bigger than 1. So if we let j go to infinity, the sequence n divided by b to the j goes to 0, which means that eventually it has to be smaller than 1. Now let's calculate when this is the case. Well, this is, of course, equivalent to b to the j being greater or equal to n, which is, of course, since the logarithm is a... Since the logarithm is a... is a monotone function, that means that j has to be greater or equal to the b logarithm of n. Ah, sorry. I made a mistake here. That shouldn't say log b a, but log b n. Sorry, that was a typo. Log b n. Okay. Now... And actually, what we have to do, n has to be like this. Now... What is the effort of all the... of all the operations that we have to take in order to get all the elements... So, yeah, f to b. So... Actually... No, well, let me see. This is not what we wanted. We want that. So this is the last subdivision we take. So it has to be at least one more. Okay, now let's calculate the effort of all the subdivisions we have to make. So the effort of all the subdivisions we have to make is to sum up everything but the last one, right? We don't have to sum up the last one because the last one is all theta of one. All the ones before are the effort that we calculated. So what is the overall effort? What is the overall effort? Okay, what is the overall effort? Well, first we have to calculate how much effort we have in the last iteration. So how much effort is in the leaves of the tree? In order to do that, we have to count how many leaves we have and how much effort we have. So how many leaves do we have? The number of leaves is a to the, because in every iteration we get multiple, our number of problems gets multiplied by a. So we know that in the last subdivision we have a to the j subproblems. So we have a to the log bn plus one, many leaves. Okay, now this of course is, since a is a constant, the a to the one is only multiplicative constant. So this is theta of a to the log b of n. Which is not really looking like the watershed function by now, right? So this is the number of leaves. So how do we recalculate this? Well, we have seen the trick already last time. So now let's calculate what a to the log b of n is. Well, we have already seen that what is a? a is b to the log b of a. To the power of log b to the n. This is times log b to the n. But we know that b to the log b of n is n. Which is the same as n to the log b of a. And this is the watershed function. So yes, indeed, this is the same as theta of n to the log b a. So this is where the watershed function is coming from. This is basically the effort that it takes to calculate all the leaves. Because that's basically the number of the leaves. But now what is the effort for the leaves? Effort for the leaves. Well, this is of course the number of the leaves. Which is theta of n to the log b a. Times the effort of the leaves, which is theta of one. And I think you had to prove in the exercises class. Or we did it here in class. I can't remember really. But multiplying thetas is just multiplying the interior of thetas. So this is the theta of one times n log b a. Which is of course theta of n to the log b a. So this is the effort for all the leaves. And now we have to compute the whole effort of everything. Which is then t of n. I will move it up in a second, but I have to write there. So, t of n is the effort it takes for all the leaves. Which is theta of the watershed function. Plus the effort it takes to do all the subdivisions and recombinations. And that's basically summing up all the levels that we've got. Minus one, because we don't have to care about the last one. So we go from zero, the zero subdivision, to the last one. Which is log b of n. And now we have to sum up all the efforts. And the effort is a to the j of f to n divided by b to the j. Okay. Okay. Well, and this is what we actually said in the formulation of our lemma. So we've calculated the formula so we're finished. So the first thing is done. Using the subdivision three method in a very general way. Oh, I'm sorry. I again did one thing wrong. But I will edit for the recording. I will leave this open a bit in the recording for a few minutes. So all of you, I forgot to switch to the slide. So here in the lecture room, you saw the slide all the time. But I forgot to switch it for the recording. So you have a bit of time to look at it. Okay, now. Let's calculate. Or let's look at the next step. So what do we have to do next? Well, two things are missing from that lemma here to the master theorem. The first one is we need to get an idea of what this effort actually is. Right? Because in the master theorem, we only have a seat of something. We don't have this sum here. So we have to get an estimate of what the size of this sum is. This is one thing. The second thing, we have to get rid of the base case being n equals to 1. We want to have a general base case of n equals to n0 in order to get the master theorem proved. So these are the two steps that are still missing. Okay, now let's get rid of the subdivision tree. I will switch back to the whole blackboard view. Now, okay, let's go back to our problem. Next step will be a combination of these two things. So we'll have to get the next sub lemma, which is lemma 4.2, which will help us to get an estimate for this sum. Lemma 4.2. Again, we will have our constants and our functions. So let again a be bigger than zero, b be bigger than one, and f be a function from n to r. Here. Yeah. Ah, yeah, it's lemma 4.3, I'm sorry. I just wrote the wrong thing. It was lemma 4.3. It was just a typo. Then, g of n be the sum that we have there. So we have, we call the sum g of n. Sum j equals zero to log bn of a to the j times f of n divided by b to the j. So we will call this function g of n. And we will define the function for n greater or equal to one. That's where it makes sense. So, if the sum has the following properties. First, case one. Now, we will take this famous subdivision case that we have. So, if there is an epsilon. If there exists a positive epsilon such that f of n is the first case. is big O of n to the log b a minus epsilon. So, if there is a constant g of n is capital O of n to the log b a. times l g of n. That's the first thing. The second one is, of course, the logarithm case. So, if there is a constant k greater or equal to zero. If there exists a k greater or equal to zero such that f of n is theta of n to the log b a. times l g of n. times l g of n. times l g of n. is theta of n to the log b a. times l g of n. n. So that is g of n. And finally, and this is a bit more complicated, if there is a constant c that is between 0 and 1, if there exists a constant c that is between 0 and 1, such that. And now, we have to get some information about our function f n. So what we want to have is that when we subdivide our problem into A problems of size B, and we compare the effort that it takes to our original function f of n, what we want to have is that it grows at most as c. So such that 0 is smaller or equal A times f of n divided by B, and this shall be smaller than c times f of n. Okay, so it almost, it grows at most. It grows, it doesn't grow, c is smaller than 1. It decreases at least by a factor of c whenever we subdivide a problem. If this is the case, then g of n is theta of f of n for all. So this has to be true for all n greater or equal to 1. Then g of n is theta of f of n. Okay, now, let's prove that. with basically three cases, right? So that means in the first case, we have that f of n is capital O of log A minus epsilon. And that means that we can use that to plug it into our functions here. So case one. Since f of n is capital O of log B A of n, sorry, of n to the log B A minus epsilon, we get that f of n divided by B to the J, of course, is capital O of n divided by B to the J to log B A minus epsilon, right? It's just plugging in what we had. So why is this true? Usually, you cannot plug in functions in O. So we have not proved anything that tells us that whenever we have a function is capital O of something and another function. So usually it is wrong to say that from f of n being capital O of G of n, this usually does not imply that H of f of n is capital O of H of G of n. So this is usually not correct. But in this case, it's simpler because what we do is we compute products, right? So we always compute products or we plug in things here. This is a simple division. So for those, it's true, right? But you cannot do this in general. You cannot compose O's with functions. It's important to not do that. But you can substitute these things. So this is simple. Okay, so this is something we know. So we know that this is true, which means basically that we can calculate what G of n is. So we can write G of n as what we have here. And we know that O's and sums properly compose. So that means G of n is something like the sum J equals 0 to log B times A to the J times something, which is capital O of N, which is capital O of N divided by B to the J to the power of log B minus epsilon. Right? So this is what we have. Now, we've seen that big O's and sums can be exchanged. So that means we can take out the big O from the sum. So this is the same as big O of the sum J equals 0 to log Bn times A to the J times N divided by B to the J to the power of log B minus epsilon. Okay. So this is simple. So the next thing what we can do is we can take this sum apart. There are some things that depend on J and other things that do not depend on J. Right? So what does not depend on J? The N to the power of log B, A minus epsilon does not depend on J. So this is the same as O of. Now, let's write this. So J equals 0 to log Bn. Now, what we have is that here we have an N to the log B, A minus epsilon. And then we have something that does depend on J. So what also... Well, yeah. Let's write it like this. So we have an A and we have a B to the log B, A minus epsilon to the power of J. Right? Okay. Now, let's rewrite this a bit. This N is something we can factor out from the sum because this is a factor which appears in every single sum N. So we can take it out of the sum. So we have N log B, A minus epsilon times the sum J equals 0 to log B, N. Okay. Now, here we have a B to the minus epsilon. This is something we can put on top. So this is A times B to the epsilon divided by B to the log B, A. Right? Because log B, A minus epsilon is log B, A divided by B to the epsilon. It's B to the log B, A divided by B to the epsilon. And if you divide down there, it goes up. And here we have an A. Which is from here. And here we, this is, right? Now, what is log, what is B to the log B of A? B to the log B of A is A. Right? So this is A. So this and this cancels. Which is a capital O of N to the log B, A minus epsilon times the sum J equals 0 to something log B, N. And here, the only thing that remains is B to the epsilon times J. Okay. But this is a geometric sum, right? Because this is B to the epsilon to the J. Okay. Let's write it like this. Okay. Let's write it like this. Okay. Let's write it like this. And so we can calculate the sum, which is capital O of N log B, A minus epsilon times this here. So how does it work? In the denominator, we have 1 minus B to the epsilon. And in the denominator, we have 1 minus B to the epsilon to the power of log B, N plus 1. So this is the formula for A geometric sum. Times epsilon. I think I've forgotten. No. Ah, yeah. I did. B to the epsilon. Right. Okay. Great. Now, this is nice. So what we can do is we can now figure out how to get an estimate for that final thing. Okay. So in capital O, it doesn't matter where we put our constants. So we can take the constant out of, so this here is something we can take out of the big O. We'll take it back in later. Because it doesn't matter where the constants are. Oops. Okay. Okay. So let's look at that again. So this is equal to N to the log B, A minus epsilon. Times capital O of. Now, this 1 minus B to the epsilon is actually constant. And now, depending on whether this is bigger or smaller or equal to 1, usually B is bigger than 1. So this is a constant. So we can ignore the denominator. This is what I wanted to say. Okay. So now, what we do have is that, so this is B to the, yeah, 1 minus B to the epsilon times log BN plus 1, which is actually rounding up, let's write it down, log BN plus 1, divided by 1 minus B to the epsilon. Now, we need to figure out what this is. The power of 1 doesn't matter here. So we need to figure out what is B to the epsilon, rounded down, log BN plus 1. The rounding doesn't matter if N is large. So this is the same as B to the epsilon log BN plus 1. And this only is a B to the epsilon, which is also a constant. Which is also a constant. So this is capital O of B to the epsilon log BN. Which is B to the log BN to the power of epsilon, which is N to the epsilon, which is capital O of N to the epsilon. Which means our equation from above is actually N to the log BN minus epsilon times O of something that is N to the epsilon, which is the same as capital O of N to the log BN minus epsilon plus epsilon, which is 0, which is capital O of the N to the log BN minus epsilon. And so we finished in case 1. Because this is what we actually said down there. Back down there. Right. So we said that G of N is capital O of N to the log BN in case 1. So case 1 is finished. Well, case 2 works the same way. Okay. So let's do case 2. In case 2, we have that F of N is theta of N to the log BN times LG to the K of N. Right. So this was the second case. And that means that we can plug this in into our G of N. That means that G of N is, again, we have a sum. J equals 0 to log BN of A to the J. And F is theta of this, which is N divided by B to the J to the power of log BN times LG to the power of K of N divided by B to the J. Just plugging in our N. We can do the same as before. So we can now again take this apart into our two cases. Now, this, of course, is as before. And now we take it a bit shorter. So I don't write down every step. So we take out the theta from the sum as before. Right. So we first take the A to the J into the theta. Because this is a constant function. We can have something like theta 1. So we can exchange that. Then we can take out the theta with the sum. Because thetas and sums, as we've seen, commute. We've only proved it for two. But that doesn't matter. Of course, by induction, it combines with, it commutes with as many sums as you like. So that's the first thing. Then here again, we have an N to the power of log BA, which does not depend on J as before. So we can take this N to the log BA out of the sum and out of the theta if we want to. So this is theta. So we have N to the log BA. So we have N to the log BA. And then we have our sum. J equals zero to log B. N. So what remains? We have our A divided by B to the log BA to the J. And then we have our LGK. To the power of K of N divided by B to the J. Okay. So this is again A. B to the log BA is A. And A to these cancel. And one to the J is one. So this all power here cancels. So this is again A. So this is again A. Right? So that means that this is the same as theta of N to the log BA. Now let's look at the sum and let's rearrange that a bit. Now we always have log B's and there we have an LG. So we need to recalculate our log to base 2 to log to base N to log to base B. So this is simple by the standard logarithm formula. So this is the sum J equals zero to log B of. Now here we have LG to the power of K. which is basically a log B. N divided by B to the J. Divided by a log B of 2. And this to the K. To the power of K, of course. I forgot to the K. Okay. So now why did I do that? Because of the logarithms. So how do we produce this? Now it's easy to calculate. So this is N to the log B times the sum J equals zero to log B of. Now a logarithm of a quotient is the difference of the logarithms. So this is the log B N minus the log B of B to the J. But the log B of B to the J is J. Now we have to divide this by the log B of 2. And all of this to the power of K. Okay. So we can safely take out this one. Because this doesn't depend on J. So this is the same as theta of N to the log B A. Divided by the log B2. To the power of K. Times the sum. J equals zero to log B N of log B N minus J to the power of K. Oh shit. I forgot to turn off my mobile phone. Sorry about that. Okay. Now let's look at what this is. So this is the final thing. So it doesn't matter. This one doesn't matter because this is a constant only. So this is theta of N log B A times the sum. J equals zero to log B N of log B N minus J to the power of K. Right? So this is the sum that we need to analyze. So we need to figure out what this is. So what is the sum? J equals zero to log B N of log B N minus J to the power of K. So this is the strange sum we need to analyze. Okay. So this is somewhat easy. Okay. Let's look at this. So the sum J equals zero to log B N of log B N minus J to the power of K. Small or equal. The sum J equals zero to log B N of rounded down log B N minus J plus one. Right? So if you round it down and add a one, then we only get it bigger. So if you're going to move the index by one, then we can move the index by one. So we can shift the index by one. So we can shift the index by one. So this is the same as we just turn the index around from top to bottom. So we replace the index by one. So we replace the J by log B N minus J plus one, which then produces a new sum, which is the sum from I equals one to log B J, log B N plus one of I to the K. Okay. But this is always a polynomial. So the sum of the powers of K is always a polynomial in K. And it's always a polynomial of a degree more and more. So this is capital O of log B N plus one to the power of K plus one. And so we don't have to care about the one. So this is then equal to O of L G K plus one N. Okay. That means, therefore, using that as before, star is equal to a theta of. Actually, and this also works the other way around. So we can take this from above as well if we take a greater equal and we, so yeah, I should have done that also. Sorry. So the sum J equals zero to log B N of log B N minus J to the K is greater equal to sum J equals zero to log B N of log B N rounded down minus J to the K. And this is then a sum from zero to log B N. I equals zero to log B N of I to the K, which is also a capital omega of L G to the K plus one N. And so this then implies that the sum of N. And both of these things together imply that the sum J equals zero to log B N of log B N minus J to the K is a capital theta of L G to the K plus one of N. And so this then implies that the sum J equals zero to log B N. And so this is equal to a theta of N to the log B N times L G to the K plus one N because this is a product in here. And thetas work like products. And this is what we wanted for case two. And we will prove case three tomorrow. And we will look at the Akrabatze method and the finish, the final part of the proof also tomorrow. So I wish you a wonderful afternoon and see you again tomorrow. Bye-bye.
