Hi. So, now everything's set up. Good morning. Yes, well, yesterday, last time, last week, we talked about dynamic programming, and we started with a rod-cutting problem, right? And the next problem that we discussed was the problem to multiply matrices. And the last thing I remember doing was telling you that this obviously makes difference in what sequence you multiply three matrices, right? Just with our example of three matrices, the difference was between 7,500 multiplications and 75,000 multiplications. So, obviously, there's something to optimize there, the sequence and the parenthesizing of the products. And today, we will figure out how to solve that problem properly. So, let's think about what we know. So, if we have this matrix product, so we have matrices A1, A2, and so on, up to An, then what we can do is we can put brackets in there, so parentheses in there. Of course, there is a recursive way to define when such a parenthesized expression is well formed, right? And the basic idea is, and this is true for many computer science things or related mathematical algorithmic things, is, you know, induction, right? You know mathematical induction, and mathematical induction usually uses something along the idea that the natural numbers are totally ordered. And so, you start, and every element has a successor. So, you start with any element, usually zero or one, and then you prove that whenever you know it for natural number, you know it for the next natural number. And by that trick, so to speak, you can prove something for every natural number. So, this is mathematical induction. The same can be done with more complicated problems like algorithms, as long as there are simple steps that transfer one, let's say, formula or one thing to another. Okay, so what are the simple steps here? Sorry. Sorry. Okay. What are the simple steps here? Well, a single matrix is apparently a properly formed product, right? So, a single matrix, oops, A, single matrix is properly formed. So, that's the first thing. Second, if you take two properly formed products, right? So, if F and G are properly formed products, then F and G is also properly formed. And that's already enough to define how the parentheses works. This forms the products in some strange way. So, you have to write A1 times A2. For example, this is properly formed that A1, A2 is not. If you want to do it better, you can do a case distinction there. Right? So, a possibility to avoid that problem. So, these are tricks for later. So, if F is a single matrix, then, or FG are both single matrices, matrices, then FG is properly formed. If F is a single matrix, then FG is properly formed. And if G is a single matrix, then F in parentheses G is properly formed. If you add these three specifications as sub points, then all the ways you want to write down matrix products with parentheses are properly formed. Right? So, we know what to do when we write down matrices. Okay. So, now, what we can use is we know now how to build up products of matrices. Right? We can only multiply two together in one step. So, this makes sure that we only multiply a result together with a new matrix. We only have to compute the single product in every step. Right? First, we need to evaluate what we have inside of a parentheses. Right? And, once we've finished to evaluate these things, we have two matrices left and produce a new one. Right? So, the result is even one new matrix. Sorry. There's so much dust here. Okay. Well, now, this doesn't look very inductive. Right? But, the idea is what you can do now if you want to reason about parenthesized matrix products, what you can always do is you can prove things about all of them if you prove something for every single point here. So, start is always a single matrix. So, if you know something for a single matrix and you prove it, this is like the induction, the start of induction in the natural numbers. Right? The natural numbers have a building method very similar to that one, but a very simple one. Right? So, the idea is that zero is a natural number and every natural number that comes after natural number, plus one is also a natural number. And so, this is the build, the construction principle of the natural numbers and this is how induction works. You start with one and then you prove it for the next one and then you prove it for all of them. If you want to prove something about matrix, properly formed matrix products, you have to do the same thing. So, you have to prove something for one. Right? So, you have to prove something for single matrices and then once you know something for properly formed products, you need to prove something for the product. Right? And then you know it for all matrix products the same way as you do it for natural numbers. This is called structural induction. So, the principle is called structural induction. It's very similar to mathematical induction. However, we don't need it now. What we want to do is we want to analyze how to solve that problem to find the properly formed matrix product that provides us with the correct result but with the fewest number of multiplications, so scalar multiplications that we need to calculate. So, of course, what we can easily do, we can easily figure out how to solve that problem recursively. Right? So, how can we solve that problem recursively? Well, we just follow this deconstruction principle, this construction principle. So, what we do know is a single matrix, the product costs nothing. Right? Because we don't have to compute anything. so, for this, the effort is zero. Right? For computing such a formed product, we know what the effort is. Right? We have to calculate the effort of calculating f first. Then, we have to calculate g, and then we have to compute the product between f and g. Okay, so now, what we have is that f is the product of some matrices, g is the product of some matrices. So, we'll never change the sequence of the matrices, right? So, what we do is, we look at what happens if we multiply a1 to a, and now I have to check whether it's i or k or j or whatever in the book. I think it is j. No, wait, let me see. Well, it's more general. So, let's do it like this. So, we know that we multiply a1 to aj, and then we multiply aj plus 1 to an, right? And in order, so I haven't put the parentheses in the subproducts, but what you definitely know is the effort calculates as computing the effort of multiplying a1 to aj, right? Then we have to add the effort of multiplying aj plus 1 to en, right? So, therefore, what is the effort? The effort, let's call the effort m. So, m1 to j is the effort of that one. Then we have to add the effort of j plus 1 to n, and then we have to add the effort of multiplying, of computing the result. And we know how to compute the result. Well, the result is the number of elements in a1, which we called n1, right? Or, did we call it n last time? Well, I think I called it n. I have no idea how it's called in the book, because it didn't check. In the book, it's called p. p. Okay, so let's write it down for the moment for this analysis, so that it doesn't, so it's not too much removed from the book. So, a i is in r pi times pi plus 1. No, i minus 1 times pi. So, this is what a looks like. So, we have here p0 times pj times pn, because we've already figured out that multiplying three matrices depends on the three dimensions. On the dimension of the first matrix, the number of rows of the first matrix, the number of rows and columns of the product, and the number of columns of the second matrix, right? Okay, great. So, this is the effort when we want to calculate m1n. So, if we want to calculate the product of all of the matrices, this is the effort. So, we first produce parentheses around the first j and around the last n minus j matrices, and then we compute that product, which is the best what we can do here. this is the best what we can do here, plus this multiplication. And this is, of course, not m1n, sorry. m1n is the minimum over all j. j. So, j in 1, 2, n minus 1. Those are the choices we have. So, we can keep a1 single and multiply all the others together. and the last thing what we can do is we can multiply all the 1 to n minus 1 together and keep n as the single one. And so, what we have is that mii is 0, right? So, this is what we know. If we take a matrix alone, then we have 0. and of course, now, we can take the same principle for every intermediate product that we have. So, if we want to compute mij, which is the product of the matrices ai to aj. So, if we want to compute mij, we have the same idea. So, what you need to do is we need to compute the minimum over all the splits of the matrices mij that we can do. Where can we split? Well, we can split at k in the set i to j minus 1. Right? So, that's the last split we can do. And, what do we have to add up, well, we have to add up the effort, the best effort to compute the product between i and k. Then, we get the effort of computing the product between k plus 1 and j. k. And, in addition, we have to multiply the number of rows of the first matrix, which is pi minus 1, times the number of columns of the first matrix, which is equal to the number of rows of the second one, which is pk, times the number of columns of the last matrix, which is pj. So, this is the general recursion for all i and j, and this is true for i, for 1, smaller equal i, smaller than j, smaller than n. And, of course, still, if i and j are equal, then zero. So, there is smaller equal, sorry, forgot, the smaller equal here. Okay, so, this is the recursive formula. Now, and, of course, what we could do now is we could do, we could implement the optimization by recursion as before. So, we could write a very simple operation that just calculates this thing in a recursive call. All right? So, we could call the recursion on m1n, and then we write the loop for j equals 1 to n minus 1, and then we would call recursively mik, we could call recursively mk plus 1j, then we would add this number, which is only a number, and that would be it, right? So, this is the very simple implementation to solve that optimization problem. problem. And we will run into the same issue that we had with the rod cutting problem, because also here, we will re-evaluate several products again, and again, and again, especially the single ones, so you can see that no matter how to parenthesize it, at the end you will always end up with single matrix products, and then you will end up with matrix products A, I, A, I plus one, you will calculate them over and over again. So, a possibility to solve the problem is by the same trick that we had with the rod cutting recursion, so that we can do a memoization of the method, so that we remember what of the MIJs we've already calculated, and without traversing the recursion again, we could just return it and then keep it like this. So, the way forward is quite simple. Recursion and memoization is always something that helps you to solve these recursive blow-up, right? Otherwise, I don't prove it. This is again, an exponential effort that you have to take. If you do just the recursion, it's a Catalan number, the number of iterations, and they grow exponentially fast. So, here also, we have an exponential effort, in the worst case, if we implement that as a recursion. If we do memoization, we don't recalculate everything, and we have an order of n cubed at the end. What we do now is we will try to develop the bottom-up method again. So, think about what we need to calculate in what sequence in order to get the result that we want. Okay? So, the recursive method is simple. But now, let's try to do the bottom-up method. So, bottom-up means we start, like in the rod cutting problem, we start with the simpler sub-problems first, and make them larger and larger until we have the really big ones solved. Okay, so, now what we need to figure out in this one, in the rod cutting problem, it was somewhat easy, because in the rod cutting problem, every sub-problem had only a single dependency, which was the length of the rest of the rod. Here, we have two dependencies, right, with I and J. So, this simple, and here, the recursion of course calls two things in every iteration, not a single one. So, this looks different. So, we need to figure out how to properly build up the sub-problems for the ones that we need later. So, in order to do that, we have to figure out what is the common thing when we subdivide a longer product. So, what is the common thing? Well, the common thing apparently is that both sub-problems that we get, get smaller in length, right? So, we have to multiply fewer matrices once we decide where to put the first pair of parentheses. Both products that we get later are shorter. They might mix up, they might move from there to there or so, but both of them get shorter. That means that whatever we do, if we look at the recursion, the recursion first has to solve sub-problems of shorter length first. And we cannot avoid any of those because we need to figure at least out, well, we know that single matrices cost nothing, but products of two matrices are interesting to know because all of them can feature prominently, so we need to compute the product of two matrices anyway, which is, and we know which two matrices can only feature, right? We can only have A1 times A2, A2 times A3, A3 times A4, until An minus 1 times An, right? So these are the only possibilities for two matrix products. The next size, of course, will be three matrix products, which is either A1, A2, A3, A3, or A2, A3, A4, right? Okay, so this is probably the way to go. So how to multiply the matrices, and so that means we first have to calculate all the m's that have a distance where i and j have a distance of 1. Then we have to multiply all the i and j where i and j have a distance of 2, then where they have a distance of 3, and in order to compute all of them, we need the smaller ones, but the smaller ones will already be computed. Okay? So, I don't do I want to figure that out? So probably not, so probably I will just send you a picture first. So, let's switch that to there and here and there and hopefully. Yes, I remember that I have to turn this down so that you can see something. Oh, yeah. So these are the strange diagrams from the book. no, they're not strange, it's just the idea. So in the lower row, you have to read it like this so that you take the diagonal lines and connect them. So the matrix A1 is M11. So M1 runs like this diagonally down, the other one runs like this diagonally down. So A11 is 0, right? So the next one is A12. So the I runs down diagonally like this in the first upper row and the J runs down like this. So A12 multiplying A1 by A2 in this example of the book. If the matrix dimensions are down there, right? So if a 30 times 35 matrix for A1, 35 times 15 for A2 and so on. So all the sizes are down there. So if you multiply A1 by A2, you have 15,750 elements. And you can read this in two different ways if you want to do that. You can either run down the lines or you can follow up the matrices. So if you want to know what A1 times A2 times A3 times A4 is, you just look at the last row and you see A1 is all to the left, A4 is somewhere in the middle. And then you follow these things up until you hit the tip of the triangle. So the best product of multiplying A1 to A4 is 9,375 up there. So if you want to know the best product between A2 and A4, you just follow these two lines where they meet. This is the yellow 4,375, which is the best product of A2, A3, A4. So this is the idea. And the idea to compute this is to build this up from bottom to top. So first we start by computing all the zeros, which we don't compute, right? So then we start by computing all the single products. So we go along the line, the second row from below, from the left to the right. So first we compute the 15, 750, then the 2625, then the 750, then the 1000, then the 5000, and we hop up one line and compute it up there. So this is the idea of the bottom up algorithm and so it's bottom up here quite literally in the diagram. And I will talk about what the other diagram means to the right in a moment. Now what we do is we look at the algorithm which is matrix chain order. And it computes two tables. The table M1N to 1N which is MIJ and then we call S1 to N-1 and 2 to N which will be used to reconstruct the solution. So if you remember in the bottom-up method we had for computing the optimal value of the rod cutting problem we also had two arrays. The first array that computed us the optimal cut effort so what the best price was and the other was which remembered where to cut in every step. That was the S and using this S we could figure out what the actual cuts were that we had to take and here it is the same. So we have one array that remembers which of what is the actual value of the MIJs and the other one is what was the actual cut that we had to take to get the minimum. So this is what is stored in S and if you have a look at this iteration then what you can see we first initialize the MII with zero so that we don't have to calculate the zeros and then we go through the chain length so we start with chain length two so product length two and we go until we are at the product length that we're interested in which is n multiplying all the n together and then we start with the first matrix and we end with the last matrix such that the chain of length L still fits right so which is the last matrix is n minus L plus one which is the last matrix so we start that's the last cut that we can take right so the first cut that we can take is in the beginning but the last cut that we can take is n minus L plus one and so this is where the chain ends the chain ends in I plus L minus one and then we calculate the minimum which is the for loop that is down there between line eight and line twelve so we go through all the possible cuts between k equals i and j minus one and then we cut it in m i k plus m k plus one j which is exactly the formula down there plus pi minus one times p k times p j which is exactly that formula here we calculate all of these for all the possible k's and then we calculate the minimum which we do here down there in this if and we remember what the value of the minimum is and we remember what the position of the best cut is in sij and then when we finished we just deliver back m and s so let's go back to the diagram the diagram tells you where we're going from bottom to top it's a bottom up method so we calculate all the the pairs the pair products first which is the lower row then starting from the lower row we calculate all the triple products next of course using all of the pairs down there so and we store the index in the s array which is depicted on the right so of course single matrix products are simple that's just the matrix themselves and then we see in order to calculate a1 times a2 times a3 the best cut is at 1 if we want to calculate a1 times a2 times a3 times a4 so the best cut is 3 and so so these are the s's that we store and at the end we can read off at the top what the best effort is the best effort is about 15,125 products as a scalar products to calculate and the last cut that we take is 3 so 3 is the last cut in the first in the biggest thing at matrix 3 now let's figure out how we can recompute the whole solution well this is also something we can read off so apparently what we have to do is we have to calculate the product of a 1 to a3 first and a4 to a6 so we calculated a3 because the cut is a3 okay so we calculate a1 to a3 and a4 to a6 which means that we have to check in the product of a1 to a3 is this right is this what 3 yeah I think so well I have to well is this did I tell you something wrong or didn't I because there's something this wait is the 3 the 1 to a3 or well I think so yeah should be so we calculate a1 to a3 let me think I have to check but I thought it through yesterday in the evening when I prepared the lecture course but of course I think so well let me think whether this is right but I think it is yeah okay anyway it's true so the 3 tells us this 3 here tells us that we have to multiply a1 to a3 first and then what we have to do is we have to figure out what the best product between a1 and a3 is so a1 and a3 is 1 so here is a1 which means that we have to multiply a1 by a2 times a3 which is this here so we have to multiply a2 times a3 is the 2625 so which means if we reconstruct the solution I write it down I know you can't read it but I will turn on the lights a bit later so we have a1 to a3 so let's write down our product a1 a2 a3 a4 a5 a6 so the first parenthesis is the 3 which tells us that we have to put parenthesis here then we have to calculate the a1 to a3 and at a1 to a3 that's where the arrow is it's just covering the one that we have to know this one so that means that we have to split off at a1 which means that we have to put parenthesis there so it's a1 times a2 a3 and the other thing that we have to solve is a4 times a6 a4 a5 a6 so let's have a4 a6 is and a4 a6 is a5 right so between 6 and 4 is a5 which means that we have to split at 5 which means that we have to put our other parenthesis there splitting at 5 so this is then the best result at the end sorry so this is the end result of the optimal thing so that gives us the possibility to calculate the solution but it also gives us the possibility to reconstruct the optimal solution by what we've stored in our s array and of course we can also write down the algorithm to do that and the algorithm to do that works like this so of course if a is equal to j we're down at the matrix level so we print a i and otherwise we print the parentheses and then we recursively call that we print the optimal parentheses s and i and sij and at sij plus one to j which is what we did here right so we just put the parentheses at the proper places and this eventually will print out exactly what we wrote down a times a 2 3 times a 4 5 times a 6 which is the optimal solution in that regard and what is the effort of this this is probably what we want to figure out as well so how much effort does it take for us to calculate that solution I have to turn off again and turn on again I'm very sorry that these light games are so non trivial here so let's figure out how much effort we have to take why is this not gone okay there okay so what do we know about this this products this this recursive call or this this bottom up call if we look at the operation that we have to take we need basically three loops which are nested so the first loop is about the length of the sequence of matrix that we have to compute an optimal product for which goes through the triangle from bottom to top which is the first loop that we have to take the second loop that we have to take is we have to go from the from the left to the right for all the chains right so we have to take the chain that starts at one we have to take the chain that starts at two the chain that starts at three and so on until we are at the chain that starts at n minus l minus one or so or plus one which is the last one right this is the second loop and the third loop is to calculate that minimum of all the possible cuts so we have three nested loops that grow in size all of them grow in size as the pyramid grows as n grows which means that the effort is order of n cubed because we have three nested loops all of which depend on size n and actually we even have theta of n cubed for the algorithm because we cannot do it faster actually it's also true for the recursion the recursion with memoization is also theta of n cubed and the recursive procedure without memoization is order of two to the n so this has an exponential effort oops okay well now we want to figure out when can we actually do that trick so when is that trick viable or usable and what is important in computer science now and also in optimization this is in some way the simplest form of dynamic programming so dynamic programming is used for other things as well it's also called dynamic programming it's not exactly the same thing but it's very very similar to what we're doing and so this is the simplest and original form of dynamic programming so when can we do that what do our two problems that we solved right we solved exponential effort we reduced exponential effort to polynomial effort polynomial means of course the theta what is in the theta is a polynomial and not an e to the something or two to the something so what is the relation between these two things well the first one is that we could subdivide our problem or we could reduce the solution of our big problem to solutions of smaller sub problems and what is very important is that the optimal solution of the big problem right had as sub problems the optimal solution of the sub problems which says that it's sub problem optimal so we have optimal substructures okay so this is the first thing we need to understand actually that's the same as solving a routing problem right so if you want to go the best route from A to B then optimally you also have to go optimally shortest way you cannot take detours in between two points that are on the best routes right so if you want to find the best route from A to B among different intermediate stops then also the sub problem has to be the best route from A B C D from B to C right you cannot have a detour between B and C because you could always make it shorter so all of these have optimal substructure so whenever you want to solve something it has to have the optimal substructure then you can do the same trick right because then you can solve the simple sub problems first and build up the solution by that so this is the first thing you have to do you have to know!!!! So basically what you also want to do is you want to make a choice right so it somehow depends on making a choice or making two choices or whatever and the choice splits your problem into basically independent sub problems right you don't want to have these sub problems to the solution of that sub problem being dependent on the solution of the second sub problem so you want to have two independent solutions this is the same also in the root planning problem right so if you decide to go from A to C then you probably have the choice whether you pass B between or not right so if you have two roots and one goes through B and the other goes to B prime you have this choice whether you want to go through B or you want to go through B prime but then afterwards once you made the choice the route from A to C does nothing have to do with each other right so changing the solution between A and B doesn't change anything how you go from B to C so you want to subdivide this into independent sub problems okay this is the second thing you need to do and what you get is once you solve the two sub problems the optimal solution is you basically paste them together to get the optimal solution of the large problem okay so this is the sub problem space idea that you have to follow so if you have these sub problem structures then this is then you can build up an optimal solution by that and so this is basically once you figure it out that your problem has such a structure then you can do this method and usually then both ways to solve the problem work equally well doing the bottom up method that solves the simpler sub problems first and then more complicated ones or solving the top down method that recursively takes the decision where to cut and then recursively calls the sub problems and then memoizes what is the solution of the sub problems that you have so those are approaches that so those are problems that make the approach of dynamic programming like doing these bottom up calls possible if this is not the case then you can't do that so what is the next idea so the next idea I said it already is if you have shortest path problems right so if you have a graph who knows what a graph is did you learn what a graph is already at the maths basics did you have some graph theory already a bit no okay great so I will tell you what a graph is first so what are graphs because graphs are something which are very important in computer science so let's talk a bit about what graphs are so basically a graph starts with a set so definition let v be a finite set okay so we start with a finite set there are also infinite graphs but we don't care so then just get rid of finite okay now graphs in maths have two different flavors the first one is directed graphs the others are undirected graphs and actually they're even mixed ones but I don't introduce them now because we don't need them now okay so if we have a finite set then if E is a subset of the set V over two so what is the set V over two this is a notation that just says that the set of subsets I J where I and J are both in V so that means that E is a subset of the set of all two element subsets of V right so take all possible two element subsets of V and take a subset of those we call we call gamma equals V and E an undirected graph that graph V it's set V or gamma V of gamma which is V it's set of vertices and E of gamma which is E it's set of edges if I J is in E we say that the vertices I and J are connected or adjacent adjacent and write I J for the edge from I to J okay let's give an example and let's give the typical way of putting down graphs right so what you usually have you have a set of vertices and usually they have some names so let's call the vertices 1 2 3 or A A B C D E and F so the set V is therefore A to F okay and now we look at the set of edges and whenever two of these vertices are connected then we draw a line between them so let's look at something like this right so we've drawn lines between them sometimes we draw lines like this and what is important is whenever they cross but we don't have a dot there this is not a new vertex just because the cross that's just the crossing of edges because not every graph can be drawn on a plane only planar graphs can so they're called planar graphs if you can draw them without self intersecting edges but only if there is a dot then these are new edges so let's look at what is the edge set of that one well I hope I don't forget anything so of course we have AB we have AD and we have AE and A is connected to three things so we have AE then what about B we have BD and BC BC and BD so then we are through with B so what is C with CD CE and CF CD CE and CF and what about D D is only connected to F because all the others we already have so DF then we have to look at E E is going through F and that's it so this is the set of all the edges this graph has a graph is by the way called complete if the edge set is everything is all the set V over two that means if any two of these things are connected then it's also called a click so a graph and we might need clicks later a graph is called complete if E of gamma is the same as V of gamma over two we also call complete graphs a click now so this is basic this is the basic definition of what a graph is now let me think an undirected graph an undirected graph now there are several possibilities that we could add if we wanted to I just give you more things that might end up later so those elements are all that the edges are all two element sets right that means in a two element set you have always two different vertices because otherwise it would be a two element set you cannot write the set a a this is not a set if you want to add one element sets this is possible so if we can say the set of edges is the set of all two element sets union the set of all one element sets what you can get is an undirected graph with loops so you have edges that connect vertices with themselves I don't define that now okay that's just the possibility to do so now we want to add another thing which is the second class of graphs and we again start with the finite set so everybody got that so next definition so definition if V is a finite set and E is a subset of V times V without delta where delta is the set of all I I for which I is in V then gamma equals V E is called a directed graph it's called a directed graph and again if I and J if the pair I J is in E for I J in V then we say that I is connected to J what is that sound okay anyway okay let's let's write let's draw an example so let's again use our A B C D or E here we have a D and F let's use the same vertices as before so V is A B C D E F and then usually directed graph we have to not only remember which of the nodes are adjacent but we have to remember which node is connected to which meaning that we usually draw arrows so that means that the element A B is in the set E but not the element BA because this is the set of pairs so it's ordered pairs so AB and BA are two different things while the set of two element sets in a set the order of the elements doesn't matter so AB and BA is the same over there the set AB and the set BA is the same but the pair the ordered pair AB and the ordered pair BA they are different because they are pairs and so when we know that the pair AB is in there but not the pair BA then we have a one direct only on a single direction so let's do other so let's go here then let's draw something there and something back and here also something there and something back but from D to F only like this from B to F like this from B to E like this and here we have the same trick whenever they cross but there is no dot there this this doesn't matter and maybe we have one here back again so like this and I should probably that you can see I should probably color in the tips of the arrows okay so let's write down the the edge set here again so what is the edge set well the edge set is the pair AB then we have to go from A to C and from A to D so AC and AD then A is gone so let's look at B so we have an arrow from B to F and from B to E so BE B F now let's look at C we have an arrow from C to E but that's it so CE then we have to go from D from D we have an arrow to F and to A so we have DA and DF let's look at E from E we have an arrow to C and we have an arrow to F so EC C and E F and from F we have an arrow to E and as you've seen by writing down the edge set from for for writing down the edge set for the undirected graph I only had to check the vertices which come later right but here you have to check all of the directions again so and here you can for example see that CE and EC are both in there because we have H in both directions and the same is true for AD so we have AD and DA both in there and the same is true for EF so this is a directed graph and those are the basic building blocks so usually have either undirected graph or directed graphs! mixed as well they are called networks but we will do them later there for example important for street networks right because you have single way so one way streets and two way streets so if you want to do route planning you have to get with mixed thing or you can translate every mixed graph in a directed graph just by adding both directed edges okay so this is a graph now the next thing is we need to talk about paths in a graph okay and I intentionally began with doing direct with starting to define directed and undirected graphs first because paths basically are true for both of them so definition let gamma be a graph so both undirected and directed graphs and let V and W be vertices in the graph we call a sequence a finite sequence V 0 V1 to VN a path of length N in gamma connecting V and W if V 0 is equal to V VN is equal to W and for all I equals 1 to N we have that VI minus 1 VI is an edge I forgot I is connected to J and if I J is in E we write I J again right so so that this this is always true okay that means that what is a path a path is just a sequence of vertices where the first vertex and the second vertex are always connected are always an edge so you hop along edges from one vertex to the next and in a directed graph you always have to hop along arrows so always in the direction where the arrow is pointing in an undirected graph you don't have arrows you can go either way because of course if I J if you have an undirected graph if I and J are adjacent then J and I are also adjacent so the edge I J is the same as the edge J I but not for directed graphs so the I J and J are different but for both of them this is a path a path is called a cycle if it connects V to V right so a path is called a cycle if it connects V to V a graph in which no cycles exist is called a cyclic so this graph is not or is it no this is not a cyclic because it can go from A to D and from D to A so there you have a cycle and you probably have more like going from well I don't know there of course and there of course but do you have longer ones I don't remember probably not E F B E right no no can't go from F to B you can go back from C to A you have CE and E F but I think that's it okay so it's anyway so a graph without cycles is called a cyclic and a directed so this is the next thing this is one thing and there is one more important thing if for any two edges vertices sorry vertices V and W a path exists from the no I will I will not do the complicated thing I will do it only for the simple case later when you do some more graph theory discrete mathematics they will tell you so if gamma is undirected and for any two any two vertices V and W there exists a path connecting V and W then gamma is called connected so a graph is called connected if you can join any two vertices in the graph by a path then it's called connected if you have any graph and you consider the following relation between vertices you learned what the relation is right so the following relation you say that V and W are related if there is a path connecting V and W this is an equivalence relation on all of the vertices of a graph and so by the theorem about equivalence relations this partitions the set of vertices into subsets that are disjoint and these disjoint subsets are called the components of the graph so all the connected paths of a large graph are called its components but why is this important an acyclic connected undirected graph is called a tree an acyclic undirected connected graph is called a tree so that's the mathematical structure that underlies everything that we did by now so all the trees are just graphs and those graphs are acyclic so they don't have any cycles in there and they are undirected because we don't have any edge directions in there a directed graph that is acyclic is called a directed acyclic graph so this is simpler to know only the trees so if by the way an undirected graph that is acyclic where each component of the graph so each connected component of the graph is a tree is called a forest and this is probably also something that we need later on okay so these are trees now if we have a graph and now that that's the basics that you need to know about graph theories what graphs are mathematically now we ask for the following problem and the problem is let's assume we have a graph right so let's assume let's assume that we have a graph we have a graph gamma and two vertices v and w in gamma and we define the distance of v and w we define the distance d of v w of v and w as the length of the shortest path connecting v to w in a directed graph so if v and w cannot be connected if no such path exists exists we write d v w is plus infinity so we can't reach them so we can't drive with our car from here to New York so the distance Vienna New York for going by car is infinity well maybe you invent some sort of car that goes on the bottom of the Atlantic oh we go back through a few tens of millennia where the bearing straight was passable frozen over or whatever then you could also drive but nowadays it's infinity so this is some sort of distance and you learned what the metric is right so it's almost something like a metric on an undirected graph because then it's symmetric because if you go from v to w you can also go from w to v on a directed graph it's not symmetric so it's not really a metric and it's not a metric because the values can be infinity but on a connected graph it is a metric on a connected undirected graph this is a metric and the question is calculating d v and w for two arbitrary vertices v and w is an interesting problem right it's the shortest path problem so the shortest path problem path problem is to calculate a dvw for arbitrary v and w in v of gamma and it doesn't matter whether the graph is directed or undirected and so this is the called or actually it's not just the short it's sometimes also called the unweighted shortest path problem I didn't tell you what a weighted graph is probably we encounter that later but if you think about what google map has to do if you ask it to tell you how to go from a to b then google maps actually solving a shortest a weighted shortest path problem because it basically knows for any two points on the map what is not only the shortest connection between the two but it also knows the time it takes or the distance it takes from going from a to b and so you can reduce all the earth or all of Vienna or whatever can reduce it to a graph and then in order to know that if there is a traffic jam on Sudostan Ghente then you know that it's an hour going from a to b there while driving through the city maybe only takes half an hour so you have different possibilities to connect and you put weights on all of the edges that basically tell you either how far it is or how long it takes to go from there to there but we are not concerned with that at the moment we're taking the unweighted shortest path problem taking every hop from one element from one vertex to the other if they're adjacent as one right so we want to calculate what is the shortest path problem is a problem that has as we've discussed optimal substructure so if you have to go from a to f right then you can make decisions you can make the decision whether you want to pass through c you want to pass through d or you want to pass through b right and then of course what you can do is you have to know what the shortest path from b to f is what the shortest path from d to f is and they are all independent and the optimal way from a to f through c is the distance from a to c plus the distance from c to f and so this is a typical problem that has an optimal substructure so you can take the decision I want to look at I want to make one hop which is to all of my neighbors and then from all of my neighbors I want to calculate what is the shortest path to my to my final destination right so this is a possibility to decompose it very similar to what we had before for the matrix products right so this has the optimal substructure problem and of course evaluating all possible paths in a graph is an exponential problem so you can have exponentially many paths through a graph and that means that this is something where you think okay this might be also solvable by doing dynamic programming right and then you can think okay what are the sub problems that I have to solve first well one possibility is first I look at all the paths that go away from a and have length one then from there I can calculate the rest so things like this is thinkable right so this is the way of thinking then what is the typical distinguishing factor between all of these things right so I have to find the minimal thing so is the minimal thing one like can I go in one hop from a to my destination well no then let's see can I get two hops and things like this is a possibility right so all of them have to be calculated anyway somehow and this is a method to to calculate the shortest path from a to d and from d to f paste them together and at the end I have the shortest path that goes through d and then I have to make all of my choices so this is a typical problem where dynamic programming works right by the way you can always you can also think about other things and now I give you another example and the other example is what is the longest simple path from a point from V to W okay so why would you want to know that well maybe you're in a tourist hotspot and you want to see as many sites as possible going from your hotel to your next destination so in the weekend I met a few guys who went through Austria that way so they flew to Vienna and then they I don't know they visited Salzburg and then they want to visit Innsbruck and then they went to I think Zurich or so where they flew on so a very short hop and they wanted to know when they are going from Salzburg to Innsbruck what are the best sites to take on the way so this is somehow a longest path problem they have many sites and what is a simple path a simple path is a path that meets every vertex only once so that doesn't contain any cycles so you go from one vertex to the other without ever meeting the same vertex again this is a simple path and so a question is what is the longest simple path problem the longest simple path problem is to find between two vertices find the longest path from v to w that does not contain a vertex twice okay now let's think whether this looks also appealing right so this is also some sort of optimization problem we want to find something that is best possible and we might think that now let's see let's go through point d then the longest path between a and f is of course the one that goes through d and that goes through a and then goes from d to f and we have we paste all of both of the longest paths together and the interesting question is is this actually true does this have optimal substructure idea other well let's think and I draw a very small diagram down there I draw a very small graph down there and let's think about this one so we have a with a b c and d and this are the edges now let's think what is the longest simple path from a to c okay so what is the longest simple path from a to c well there are two right so it's a b c and a d c both of them have lengths too so both of them are longest simple paths now that what we said that likely if this is true then let's look at one of them let's look at a b c so a b c is one of the longest simple paths from a to c well what we would think now is does this have the optimal substructure problem right so what are the substructures of this one well the substructures are the path a b and the path a the path b c so the question is is a b the longest simple path from a to b no it's not because the longest simple path from a to b is a d c b it is not a b but still a b c is a longest simple path from a to c well let's look at the other one the other one is a dc right and this contains the path from a to d but a to d is also not the short the longest simple path from a to d the longest simple path from a to d is a b c d and so apparently this one does not have the optimal substructure problem so why is this the case because we can decompose the path into two sub paths so what's the reason well let's think about this until tomorrow and let's clear it out tomorrow okay so have a nice afternoon maybe you'll figure it out
