Well, good morning to another round of lectures on algorithms and data structures. So, what have we done in the last few lessons? We've been talking about the basic data structures that are required to implement most of the algorithms that we will be talking about. And today, we will continue where we left off last time. So, last time, we were talking about arrays and about lists. We started to basically give the basic algorithms that are used to manage sets. We've been talking about the importance in algorithms to store sets. And we've distinguished between ordered sets and unordered sets. And we've seen that, in principle, we have a few basic operations to discuss. We want to insert data into a list. We want to delete data from a list. And we want to search data in our list. And maybe, if we have ordered sets, we want to have the maximal element and minimal element. And the question is, how fast can we get all of these operations done? And how much work is it to implement it? And similar things. And the basic operations of inserting, deleting, and finding elements in the list, they determine which data structure we need to use. Because the question is, is it more important to be fast for insertion and deletion? Is it more important to be fast for searching elements in the list? And depending on that, that's usually the balance between these operations usually determines which data structure you need to use. And we've seen arrays already. And if we use an array, just a standard array, to store a sorted list, for example, just to give you an idea, then finding elements in that list is quite simple. Because you can use an algorithm that is called binary search. So if you have a list that is sorted, you can start in the middle of the list and check whether the element you pick up there is greater or smaller than the element you're looking at. And if it is bigger than the element you're looking at, and you just half the array and check there. Right? Then you can check whether this is bigger or smaller. And then by subsequent halving of the index or taking the arithmetic mean between the two indices you just have been looking at, you can always find an element in logarithm of n times. Right? Because that's halving. That's what halving is doing. Producing logarithmic size effort. Good. Now, on the other hand, if you want to insert an additional element in an array, what you basically have to do is you have to find the position where I need to insert the element. Right? And then you have to copy everything that is after that element. And then you have to insert the element there. And so in the worst case, when the new element you want to insert is the first one of the element, you have to copy all the array by one element to the right. Which is, of course, then order of n effort. So inserting an element in an array as an ordered list has a worst case order of n runtime. And the same is true for deleting. Right? So if you want to delete the first element of an array, then you have to delete it and you have to copy everything to the front. So finding elements in an array as a sorted list is very fast. I can do it in logarithmic time. But insertion and deletion is quite slow. And now the other data structure we've been discussing were linked lists. I just draw them again. Actually, this is a very good way of figuring out whether the algorithms are correct or not, is drawing what they do while you're thinking about what the algorithm is actually doing. So we've seen that linked lists contain the data, like here the key, and maybe a pointer to where the real data is living. And then you have the next pointer. So let's call it next. The next point is always pointing to the next element in the list. This is a singly linked list. And this usually has a special pointer, like in Python you would use none. In C or C++ you would use null. In some other language it's called nil. But this is the thing that points nowhere. And this usually ends your list. And the list itself is usually just a pointer to the first element. Of course, it's very easy to traverse this list from left to right. It's much more difficult to find the previous element of an element. And so what you can do, if you need to do this often, you can add also a previous pointer that points to the previous element. Here the previous pointer is nil. And from here the previous pointer is this element. Then you get a doubly linked list, which where you can traverse from the beginning to the end and from the end to the beginning. And usually what you also do is you do not only store the first pointer to the first element, but also pointer to the last element. Insertion and deletion in this case are very simple. So why is this very simple? Well, both of them work basically with an order of one. So let's project that to the blackboard. Forget to change that as well. Okay. So. Inserting an element into a list. Let's say we want to insert it somewhere here. It's quite simple. We only have to think whether... And I'm doing it right away for a doubly linked list. So let's see. Let's take a new color. This one may be. So we have a new element. And we want to insert it at this position into the list. So what do we have to do? Well, that's quite simple. We just take the next pointer of the element just before and let it point to this element. Then we take the previous pointer of that element. We take that pointer and copy it here. So this is the first thing we do. So we take the pointer and copy it here. Then we copy the address of that element into this next pointer. And then we do the same thing in the other direction. So we take the previous pointer from that element and copy it here, making the previous pointer go there. And then we take... And here we insert the element and this element. The only thing we have to check is whether we are at the end or the beginning, basically. And this is what the list insert operation is doing. Up there. Actually, wait, let me see. Yeah. So this is basically... This is basically what happens. And at the same time, if you want to delete an element, we just work the other way around. So if you want to delete, let's say... Let's draw another list to make it fast. Not to confuse everybody. So we have the list. Here we have our two pointers. The previous pointer. The next pointer. Previous pointer. And the next pointer. So let's think... That we want to delete that element. Well, it's also quite simple. We just take this element here. So this next pointer. And put it in there. Making this... To point here. And then we take the next pointer from this element and put it here. Making this element point there. And then we just discard this thing. And the linked list is still a proper linked list. What you can see is that whenever we want to delete the final element or the first element, we always have to check. What happens? Why do we have to check? Because we have to update, in addition, the pointer to the first or last element. Not because the other copy operations don't work. They work very well if this is a proper pointer. But what we have to check is what happens at the beginning or the end of the list. And in order to get around that problem, what you can see is this L in the double linked list looks very much the same as the other two. The other elements, right? It has a pointer to the first element. It has a pointer to the last element. And it doesn't contain a key. That's the only thing. So what you can do in principle is you can add to this element here some sort of dummy key. Okay? And then you take the next pointer of this element to point to the first element of the array. And then you take the previous pointer to point to the last element here. And if you have a look at that idea, what you can see is that this additional element makes the list a circle. Right? So if you go forward and you take the next pointer of this element pointing here. So the next pointer of this element points here. So if you look at how all of these things run, what you can see is this makes the whole list into a large circle. Right? So if you start with this element, you can go there. Then you can traverse here. You can traverse here. And at the end, you can traverse back to the beginning. And the same is true for the other direction. So if you start here, you go to the last element. From the last element, you go one step previous, one step previous, and then you end up again at the beginning. So this makes the doubly linked list a circle. And you only can distinguish that this element is basically the governance. So the element that actually keeps the list working. And it's not the real element. Such an element, by the way, is called a sentinel. A sentinel. So sentinels are special elements that do not really belong into the data structure that you want to store. But they are only there for organizing the data structure. And this sentinel makes the algorithms themselves usually significantly simpler, astonishingly. Well, you can easily check whether the list is empty. You can check whether the list is empty if this element, where you are, is the only element. So if the previous pointer and the next pointer point to itself, then the list is empty. Because it only contains the sentinel element. If you want to insert and delete any other element, the nice thing about the sentinel is you do not really have to check whether the next pointer is empty or the previous pointer is empty. Because the pointers are never empty. They always point to something. Right? So you don't have to check. Whenever you want to... For example, you remember when we wanted to delete this element. What we needed were two. We needed the previous element of that element. And we needed the next element of this element. In order to make sure that we could change these red pointing elements. Right? In order to change these red pointing elements, we needed to access the next one. And we needed to access the previous one. Right? But the point is, if we are at the end of the list, we cannot do that because there is no next element. And if we wanted to try to get the next element from this element just by not checking, we would run into the nirvana and get a memory access error. And so what we need to do is we always need to check. Are we at the last element? Are we at the first element? And if so, we have to do something else. So we need for every insert or delete operation, we need two additional checks whether the next pointer is empty or the previous pointer is empty. But if we have a sentinel element, this never happens. Because even if we want to delete the last element, the next element is the sentinel element. So we don't have to check. Or if we want to delete the first one, the previous element is the sentinel element. So the only thing we have to check is whether only the sentinel element is left. And so if we don't have an element but the sentinel, then we don't do anything. But what we don't have to care about are these additional ifs. And since usually in data structures, it's very much a question of not only the asymptotic behavior. So it's not only important whether we have O of N or theta of N operations or theta of log N operations or theta of 1 operations to perform a specific update or search or something like that. Usually also what matters is the constant. And it does make a difference whether you have to do two checks or one check. This can speed up operations by a significant factor. And so inserting in our data structure such sentinel elements often can be of advantage. Are there any questions about this? Or is it okay? I think so what is important about the data structures? Because I will not write down everything on the blackboard. First, we have to cover a lot of ground. And second, I think most of the time the drawings are more insightful than writing down all the stuff. And I can anyway project the algorithms up there. So if you don't like this or you have questions or I'm too fast, then just don't hesitate to interrupt and ask. Okay? It's important. Okay, great. Now, so just looking at what we are doing, insertion and deletion always takes the same amount of time. No matter how long the list is, right? Because we only have to access the element itself, the next element and the previous element. So inserting and deleting in a doubly linked list is always theta of one. So insert and delete. Have a runtime of theta of one. Both. Both. Both. Which means, what about searching? So how long does searching take? Well, if we have an unordered list, because we didn't talk about anything here about ordering the list. So if we have an unordered list, basically means we have to start in the beginning and traverse the list until we found the element. And if the element is not there, we have to go through every element in the list until we are back at the beginning by a sentinel element. Which means that the worst case search effort. Which means that the worst case search effort, of course, is theta of n. So you cannot do it fast as a search. As the worst case runtime. As the worst case runtime. Of theta of n. Of theta of n. And even the average case runtime is theta of n. Because even if the elements are somehow random, you don't know it. Well, sometimes they can be at the beginning, but very often they're at the end. And the chance that an element is on any position in the list usually is 1 over n. And so on average, you have to also search for theta of n steps to get. So what you can see is the list, the doubly linked list, is just the other way around as an array. Right? Because inserting and deleting in a doubly linked list is, well, an ordered array. That's what I mean. So if you have an unordered list, insertion deletion is theta of 1 and searching is theta of n. Okay. Nice. So this is what insertion and deletion is doing. So everything there is quite simple. Oh, this is about sentinels. And this is about searching. Okay. Never mind. Okay. Great. So this is about lists. This is what I wanted to tell you about lists. Okay. So lists. Of course, what you can also do is you can arrange a list also ordered. Right? You can also use a doubly linked list to store an ordered list. And what you have to do only is you have to check that, for example, the next element of an element always points to an element that is bigger or greater equal to the element we're at. And the previous point always points to elements that are smaller or equal. So the question is, what about insertion and deletion then? What about inserting and deleting if you use a doubly linked list to store an ordered list? Well, in order to do so, what you need to do is you need to figure out where to actually insert your element. And so the first thing you have to do is you have to search for the position where you want to insert your new element. Right? Another question is, how fast can we search an ordered linked list? Okay. So how did we do it in arrays? In arrays, we used binary search. So we just took the mid of the array to start and use it as a watershed, so to speak. Because all the elements in the list are to the right in the array are bigger than the element we're at and on the left are smaller. And so this halving step always makes the array. You're still, there still remains for searching half the size than before. And so that's why the effort for searching using binary search is theta of the logarithm of n. Now, what about lists? Can we do same thing? Can we do binary search on lists? Well, the problem is we can't because we don't have a way to know where the middle of the list actually is. Right? The big difference between lists and arrays is that because arrays have this indexed memory, it's very simple to access an arbitrary element before. Right? So if you remember what we talked about in searching, in sorting, right? In sorting, we had these two ways of accessing, well, not of accessing, we had these two ways of comparing elements. We could only compare elements with each other. And if we had elements, comparisons only with each other, we knew that sorting cannot be done faster than n log n. But if we had additional information, we could do sorting faster, like in theta of n. Same problem here with searching. If we have random access, like a random access memory, like an array, then we can do searching very fast. Because we can jump and we know where the first element of a list is and we know where the last element of a list is and we always know where the middle element of a list is. In a linked list, we do not know anything, but whenever we stand at an element, we only know what the next element or what the previous element is. We don't know what the n half element is from here. And so we cannot use binary search. The only thing we can do is we can go, still traverse the list from the left to the right until we're at the element that we want to be. When we found the position where we want to insert our new element, then still it only takes theta of one time because we only have to update again the previous element, the next element, and the element itself. Right? So inserting something is still theta of one. And deleting something else is also still theta of one. But finding it is still theta of n. So what you can see is that no matter what kind of data you store in the double linked list, searching doesn't get better. Okay? Which means that storing a sorted list in the linked list data structure is not a really helpful way of storing that list. Yeah? You can do it, but it doesn't help you a lot. Right? You still have the same kind of behavior. But for insertion and deletion, you have to find the position first where you need to insert it. And this is still a search operation. The tilt takes theta of n time. Okay. So the question is how to properly store ordered data. Right? Because the only two things we've seen by now are arrays. Arrays are great for searching, but bad for insertion and deletion because they have theta of n, worst case, runtime. And linked lists are bad for searching because it still takes theta of n. You don't gain anything by ordering the elements in a double linked list. And so the next question is how can we actually store sorted data? Well, one thing we do already know is heaps, right? So we learned about heaps. And heaps can help us store data that is samasaurid. And if you remember, a heap is basically an array representation for a binary tree. And so the next thing we'll talk about are binary trees. So we talk about representing rooted trees. Rooted trees means there is a root. And yeah, as I told you, despite knowing that roots usually in trees are working or in the floor and not in the ceiling, these people in computer science like to draw trees top down. So we start with the root on the top. And then, of course, the simplest trees are the ones we've been discussing already in the heaps, which is binary trees. And so binary trees usually contain a key up there. And then they contain a left pointer and a right pointer. The left pointer going to the left child of the node. And the right pointer going to the right child of the node. And then we have left, again a left here, again a right here. And you have again a left here and a right here. And then we can continue from there. So k prime, k double prime. And then we can continue from there and go down to another element. And, of course, sometimes we don't have a right child. So the right child points to nil. And then maybe if we have a leaf, then both of the entries are nil. Then it doesn't have any children at all. Then maybe some of them have again two descendants. And so on. Maybe this is also empty. Maybe the left is empty, the right isn't. So I think you can imagine how this works. Right? So this is then some sort of representation of a binary tree. And how we can use binary trees to actually store data properly. Or how we can make the use of binary trees to store data. That's something we'll discuss a bit later. So I'm unsure whether we do it today or rather tomorrow. So, but this is the basic data structure. So now the question is, how can we do, how can we organize these trees? And are binary trees the only thing that we can actually work with? So as you can see, as always, we have a part in every node in the tree that contains the key. There is also a part in the node, which I don't draw anymore. I've only explained it last time. That actually points to the real data. Right? So you have something in the tree that contains the data in addition to the key. And there is, and organizing the data structure is by knowing which element is to the left and which element is to the right. So I think this is simple to see. Now, what happens if we don't have binary trees? But we have trees where every node can have three ternary trees or quaternary trees where every node can have three or four children. Well, simple, right? You just add additional pointers. You have a middle pointer as well to have three children. So if you have at most seven children, then you need to have seven pointers and then have a tree. I think it's clear, right? The interesting question is, what happens if you have an arbitrary number of children? Right? If you don't know how many children such a rooted tree actually has. And of course, there are two different, well, there are several different possibilities. Because the children of a node are a set. Right? And so what you can do is you can use every set data structure you like to store the children of a node in a tree. So you can use an array. You can use a linked list. Right? You can use whatever you like to store the set here. The simplest thing, which is very often used, is the left child right sibling storage. Okay? So for trees with arbitrary amount of children. So for children, we can use the left child right sibling data structure. And that looks basically like this. You have the key. And then what you have is a left pointer. And a right sibling pointer. So what does the left pointer do? The left pointer points to your left child. So you have K prime. And then you have, again, a left pointer. And you have a right sibling pointer. And the right sibling pointer points to the second child of this node. So, again, I have a left pointer. And the right sibling pointer. And the right sibling pointer points to the next child. And if the right sibling pointer points to nil, then this is the last of the siblings. And, of course, the left pointer here, again, points to child. So that's why it's called the left child pointer. Because the left pointer points to children. And the right sibling pointer points always to the other children of your node here. Which basically means that you use a singly linked list as the data structure for representing all the children of a node. Right? So this is the same as the first pointer to the beginning of your linked list. And this is the list pointer. This is the singly linked list. Right? Of course, you can also use a doubly linked list if you like. Then you have a left child and right child pointer. And previous and next children pointers. So you can have a doubly linked list. But you can also use arrays and everything like that. I think you can imagine how this works. Okay? Right. I think you don't have to do too much. What we have to think about is how much work is it to actually insert an element into a tree. And, well, it's the same as for linked list. Because you only have to update pointers. You only have to have one element. And you have to update the pointer to the left and the pointer to the right. And so insertion and deletion is also, again, theta of one. And what about for just this tree? Right? The question is, can you use it for searching? Can you use it for representing ordered data? Right? And as we know already from our heap data structure is we can actually do that. Right? Because in our heap data structure, we do know that, for example, if we have a maximum heap, that the root is the maximal element. And then we can traverse down if we want to search things. And we always know that we get smaller and smaller. So we can actually use it to somehow represent ordered data. And this is something we will use later. And if we want to do that, for example, one possibility is to say to simulate, right, to simulate binary search. So we can use this element to represent the middle element of our sorted data. Right? And always ask that elements to the left have a smaller key and elements to the right have a bigger key. Because if we do that and we make sure that all of the entries here have a bigger key than that and all of the elements here have a smaller key than that, then this is something like binary search. Right? So we start here and check whether our element that we're searching for is in the right branch or is in the left branch of the tree. Right? And so on. So this is something we can do at every position. And then searching is like in a binary search, only logarithmic amount of time. What we have to do is we have to figure out how to insert an element properly into the tree. Right? And so what can we do? Well, we just check if we want to insert an element. We just check is it bigger or smaller than that key. If it's bigger, we're going to the right because then we have to insert it on the right side. And this is something we can traverse down and then we find an element where it should be. And then we just put it there and put this element, for example, either to the right or to the left, depending on where it belongs, and increase the tree size by that. Does this work? Yes, it works perfectly. We can imagine how it works. But the problem is if we insert the elements in the wrong order, what happens is that we always, for example, insert to the left or always insert to the right. So if we start with the smallest element and we take the next smallest element, we have to insert it to the right. Right? If we do it again, we have to insert again to the right and again to the right. And what happens is we get a tree that is binary but very imbalanced. So all the right pointers are filled and all the left pointers are empty, meaning that we have constructed a list, a singly linked list, that takes a lot of additional memory because all the empty left pointers. Which means that works in principle but has also a worst case time of theta of n. And so this can't be nice, right? And so we will think about how we can make sure that these trees always stay balanced so that it really, the trees always grow to the width, to the breadth, in addition to the depth, so that we can have our logarithmic search time. And the question is how long does it take to actually do that, to make sure that the tree is balanced? And this is something we will discuss a bit later. Okay? So this is the idea. So the idea is we can use trees to store assorted data, but how we can do that is something we will talk about a bit later, about balancing trees. Okay, great. Now, the next thing we will talk about, and this is a very important subject, this is hash tables. So all of you have already seen Python. So some of you probably did do some programming in Python, and if you haven't, it doesn't matter. Because Python, it's just something I say, Python is built on dictionaries. So almost everything that you do in Python is a dictionary. And dictionaries are, in principle, maps that take a key and map the key to some other data. And the thing about the keys in Python is that you can use basically anything as a key. You can use numbers. You can use strings. You can use anything as a key. And the question is now you want to be fast in searching for these things. You want to be fast in inserting these things. You want to be fast in deleting these things. So how can you properly organize the insert, search, and delete operations when you have arbitrary keys? So we're interested in insert. Of course, as usual, delete and search. And you want to basically have arbitrary keys. For example, strings or arbitrary numbers. And we want to be fast in doing that. And so how can we organize it? Well, we've seen that one possibility to organize it is by sorting the data in an area. Then we can access the data very fast. But insertion or deletion is not very fast usually. So the question is how can we organize the data in such a way that we can use, make use of the fast access that an array has and still organize it properly. So accessing an array elements is only fast if we know the index in the array, right? If you know the index in the array of an element, then we can get it basically immediately. And the access operation is only theta of one because we only have to grab a position in memory. If we do not know the index in the array and we have to search the element first, then everything is dominated by the search operation. Until we got the index by searching and then we can retrieve the element fast. And so the question is how can we circumvent it? How can we make sure that we don't spend an awful lot of time searching stuff in an array, but how can we make sure that basically most of the time we can access it immediately by knowing the index where the element is actually stored? Okay? So the question is we have arbitrary keys like large strings, large numbers, or other things. And still we want to know the index where the element is stored as fast as possible. Okay? So this is the question and this is the stuff hash tables actually more or less solve. So the first thing that we can talk about, of course, is direct addressing. Direct addressing. I think address, yeah, address is written with double D in English. Direct addressing takes, says basically, So what we have and this is what we have to start with. We have the size of an array where we can store our stuff. Okay? And let's call, let M be the size of an array storing our data. That means that if we want to access them and then no, usually we had our array starting with 1 to M, but which is very unusual for computer science people because they usually start the array with 0 and go to M minus 1, at least in most programming languages I know. But still the book is using 1 to M, but not here anymore. Because here we just now assume that the keys in our array are from 0 to M minus 1. So they are indexed. Indexed 0 to M minus 1. And then we have keys. Then we have a set of keys. A set of, let's say, capital K keys. So if capital K is small or equal M, so if we have at most as many keys as we have entries in our array, we can use direct addressing. That basically means we just remember for every key the index, and then we just directly put our element into that spot. Right? So then we can use direct addressing. That means basically having a fixed key to index mapping. Which basically means we just use the numbers as keys. We just use the numbers of 0 to K as, or K minus 1, as the keys, and then we just directly address your array. Right? So the idea is basically like this. We have a blob of elements, a universe of keys, that's called U, and every key directly maps to an array. And inside the array, we just remember whether we have stored anything in there, like a pointer to the data that is real, or nothing, like the slash mark is the X I'm usually drawing. So just remember inside of the array whether this points to something or it doesn't, and you don't even have to store the keys, because the keys are the indices in the array. So this is a very simple way. And the very simple way seldom is enough. So you will not, in Python for example, if you take arbitrary keys, arbitrary strings as keys, you will not pre-allocate an array for every possible string that can be written. So this is nothing useful if the number of keys is really huge. So if this is very big, you will not actually pre-allocate an array that has the size of all possible keys in order to make this true. So usually, K is much bigger than M. And so we have to do something about it. So usually, K is much bigger than M. And so this doesn't, so direct addressing. Usually. So it does not work. But still, we want to have the advantage of direct addressing. And the advantage of direct addressing is that we can access elements very fast. And we can insert elements very fast. Because we only have to store something at a specific position in an array, or we have to retrieve something from a specific position in an array. And so what we usually introduce is a so-called, is a function that maps keys to numbers, to indices between 0 and M minus 1. Therefore, we introduce a map. A map. H. That goes from the universe of keys to the set 0 to M minus 1. And if we want to store, if we want to store, store an element with key K, we put it into A of H of K. So we take A to K, and then we put the element there. Okay, this sounds great, because that basically means, well, you only have to compute that function H. The function H gives an index, and then you put the element there. And if you want to search for the element, you just again calculate H of K, and then you look in the array, and if the array contains a not sign, then the element is not in there. And if the entry of the array contains something, then you found your element with your key, right? So this is basically the idea. And this function H is a so-called hash function. So H is called a hash function. Okay, now, this sounds great, because that basically means that inserting an element into your data structure takes theta of one time, because you only have to store something and have to calculate H. Retrieving it or deleting it takes theta of one time, because you just put a nil point in there, then it's deleted. And searching for it also takes theta of one time, because you only have to calculate H of K, look there, and if there is a nil in there, then it's not in. If there is not a nil, then it's in, and great, wonderful. So everything takes theta of one time. So everything is fast, right? Well, no. So the idea is great, and it is used a lot in computer science. But of course, it does have one bad problem, and the problem is the pigeonhole principle. So what is the pigeonhole principle? Well, the pigeonhole principle is if you have n boxes for pigeons, but you have at least n plus one pigeons, and you put them all in a box, then there has to be at least one box containing two pigeons, which means they have the same problem here. If you have n boxes and k keys, then this function has to map at least two keys to the same position. Right? And this is, of course, unavoidable. If you compress the number of keys down to m, then, of course, many of them will end up, or depending on the difference in size between k and m, then many of them, what is this sound? But you hear it, right? It's not my tinnitus or something like that, no. Hmm? Maybe a... Okay, anyway, let's continue. Okay, so that means that two of the keys can map to the same position. And so, what can happen is a so-called hash collision. So, if you want to insert two elements in the array that both point to the same index, but have different keys, then you get something that is called a hash collision. So, the pigeonhole principle tells you, tells us that H cannot be injective. so, there can be keys k1 and k2 with H of k1, which k1 is not equal to k2 and H of k1 is equal to H of k2. If we want to store to store data with keys k1 and k2 and k2 then we get a hash collision. and since hash collisions are unavoidable because of the pigeonhole principle, we have to make sure that we can deal with hash collisions. So, we may, we have to make sure that that we still have place for our data even in the case of a hash collision. And there are basically two possibilities to get around the problem. The first one is we might put not and we will put an array at every position but this array will point to a list and not to a single element. So, we will have an array of lists and whenever we have a hash collision we put in another element in the list at that point. Right? So, two ways around. So, two ways to mitigate the problem. the problem. First put a list or any other set you would like to into instead of single elements in the array. So, two ways that we have Second, the second possibility is to provide more than one possible places where you can actually store an element in the array. Right? So you can put in a primary storage position, a secondary storage position, a tertiary storage position, and so on. But it's still a large array. But h of k doesn't tell you everything. It tells you only the first possible point where you put your element and not every possible point where you can put your element. So let every element have, let every key have several possible places in the array. Okay. I will discuss both of these methods. And the question is, if we put the list instead of single elements in the array, then of course, worst case access and worst case search drop down significantly. Why? Because if we have the bad luck that every element we insert ends up in the same place, then what we have is a large array that is basically empty. And one element in the array that contains a list that contains all of our data. Of course, this can happen. Right? If we have a very bad hash function that maps everything to zero, then of course, we get this behavior. And we have a very, let's say, expensive list. A list with an additional array attached. Right? And the second thing is basically the same. So if we have a bad hash function, then we put the first key in its first favorite position, the second key, the second, the third, and the third. And still we have a list that is just awkwardly organized within the array. But it's still a list. And so what you can see is that producing good hash functions is the first thing you have to think about. You can have very bad ones like the one that always maps to zero. That doesn't help you at all. And so the question is what are properties of hash functions that actually tell you how to, that give you the advantage of this whole hashing procedure. Like, okay? So let's talk about that. Okay. So what do we want to have in a hash function? So what we would like to do is we like, what we would like to have is that whenever we take a key, then basically, so we want to have good average time. Okay? So we want to have good average access time, good average insert time, good average delete time, good average search time. And so what we would like to have is a hash function that basically whenever we have a key, it more or less chooses randomly an element between zero and M minus one. But it cannot choose it randomly every time because the function has to repeat the same index for the same key. So a nice hash function would be whenever we get a new key, we randomly choose an element between zero and M minus one. And then whenever we have chosen the map remembers what for each key its index was, right? Because then the chance that a key ends up in a specific bin between zero and M minus one is one over M. And then we can easily figure out what is the chance that two end up at the same position, right? Because that basically depends on if we have chosen the first one, then we have at least at most the chance of one over M to end up in the same position again. Okay? So this would be great. If we could find such a function, that would be nice. And this is actually what's called an independent uniform hash function. So the ideal case, ideal hash function is an independent uniform hash function. An independent uniform hash function means basically for every key you randomly choose an element between zero and M. So for every key independently choose a random index. And zero to M minus one. And repeat it. This is important. So whenever we've chosen one, you have to keep it at that. Of course, implementing such a thing is basically impossible. Because that basically means what you have to do is you choose a random key and then you have to add a data structure that remembers for every key the number, which basically means producing a hash table. So you wouldn't do that. But it's good for analyzing how these work. So that's a good analysis tool. And we want to have hash function that's come close to that. But finding a hash function that actually has the property is nothing that we can really do. So the question is, how can we get close to that? So how can we get close to independent uniform hash functions? And basically the idea is, sorry. And this basically also depends on what the keys are. Okay. What kind of keys do we actually have? And a very simple one is if our keys themselves are somewhat random numbers. If our keys are random numbers between 0 and 1, then it's quite simple to get a uniform independent hash function. Because that basically means we say if a key, if k is in the interval 0, 1, we use h of k is rounded down m times k. So we just take, we multiply k by m. And then we round it down to the largest integer smaller than k. So this, of course, ends up between 0 and m minus 1 because 1 is not included. And if the keys themselves are random, this is also random. But, of course, it's bad. If all the keys you get end up being smaller than 1 over m because then everything maps to 0. So everything that is smaller than 1 over m maps to 0. Everything that is between 1 over m and 2 over m maps to 1 and so on. But if the keys end up being random themselves, this, of course, puts them into random bins. So this is one possibility. So what is important about a hash table is it's, let's say, fill grade. Okay. Okay. So if we have m slopes and n elements, if a hash table, if n elements are stored in a hash table of size m. So it's fill grade. So how much is already in there or the load factor. So alpha is n over m. of course, it cannot be larger. So, of course, it cannot be larger. Well, it depends. the load factor so if the load factor is smaller than one then you would like to have that you don't get a lot of hash collisions because then in principle you have space for all of the elements if the load factor is at least once bigger than one then you store more elements in the hash table then the hash table has positions and then you need to have to start to fill in your pigeonholes right with more and more elements so if the load factor is bigger than one then of course every every position in the hash table has to contain or at least some positions in the hash table have to contain more than one element and if you compare with this one two thing here of course if every key has several possible positions in the same array then this storage method cannot have a load factor that is more than one because once you have stored m elements then the table is filled because there is no list it's just an array and if the array is full it's full you cannot put anything else but this one if you have a list at every position then you can have load factors that are way bigger than one if you want because that only depends on the size of the lists that you put in at every element so this storage method is great for having tables that have load factors that can get arbitrary large this is nice for hash tables that have load factors that are the most one okay now um the first thing and this is one one is called hashing with chaining so um hash plus list is called hashing with chaining chaining and the question is what do you know about hashing with chaining and we will assume that the hash function the hash function we use is uh independent and uniform and independent and uniform hash functions are what we call universal so independent independent uniform hash functions and universal and universal mean the chance the probability that two keys keys keys map to the same index is at most one over m okay now Okay, now, the question that we have now is, what is the average runtime for insertion, deletion, and searching in an array, in a data structure that is organized by hashing with chaining? Right? So we remember what this looks like. You have a large array, and your hash function tells you in what index of the array you are, and then when you are there, you are just inserted in a list. And so if we want to insert it, what we have to do is we have to calculate the index on where we are, and then we have to insert into the list. If we want to delete something, we have to again look for the index and delete the element from the list, and we have to search something. We again compute the index, and then we search inside of the list, and we have seen worst case of these things is inserting and deleting is theta of one. Knowing the element itself, where it sits, also deletion is theta of one. Searching for it, worst case is theta of n, because all the elements can at the end end up in the same list. Worst case. So the question is, what is average case? Because this is something that interests us more. So what is the average case? Search is theta of one plus alpha. So the theorem 11 dot, what is it? Two or three or what? I have to check. Just a second. 11, one and two. Okay, 11, one and two. So theorem 11, one plus 11, two. The two. The average case. Case runtime. Of search. In the hash table with chaining. With a independent uniform hash function. A stator of one plus alpha, where alpha is the load factor of the hash table. And it doesn't matter whether it's a successful or a failed search. So both of them take an average theta of one plus alpha time. Okay. Okay. So. Is this also a blackboard? Well, it is. It's a bad one, but it is. Okay. So. That is, of course, something we would want to prove. So let's analyze that. Let's analyze that. So, if we have independent uniform hashing, whenever we have... So, the first thing is... No, that's not the first thing. The first thing is getting rid of some of the chalk on the blackboard. Gross. And I forgot my nice wipe today. Okay, so... Let's start with an unsuccessful search. So, first, unsuccessful. So, if k, the key k, is not in the table, the chance that h of k is in the table. So, k is equal to l is 1 over m. Right? For every l, for all l in 0 to m minus 1. Right? Because that's what the random choice says. So, the chance is... That is in there. So, which means that the time it takes for the unsuccessful search... So, the time an unsuccessful search takes... ...is exactly the length of the list. ...is the length of the table at h of k. It's just the length of the list. So, what is the length of the list? Well, if the load factor is alpha, the expected length of the list... ...if everything is on average, it's alpha. Which is equal to the expected... ...the expected length of the list, which is alpha. And since we take order of one for actually calculating the hash function... ...h of k is theta of one. We have... ...an average case... ...run time... ...of theta of one plus alpha. The one and the alpha together. So, for unsuccessful search, it's simple. Now, the question is... ...what about successful search? Assume second successful search. ... Well, if it's random, then the chance that we search for a specific element... ...that is already in there is one over n. ...because we have n elements in the list. So, the probability... ...so, let x be any element... ...in the table... ...the table... ...then the chance... ...that we search... ...we search... ...for x... ...is one over n... ...if we have stored n elements in the table. So, what is... ...the time it takes for us... ...to actually search... ...for x... ...in... ...the... ...hash table? Well, what we still do... ...is we still compute... ...the key, right? ...the hash of the key. The hash of the key... ...provides us... ...with an entry... ...in our list... ...in our table. And then we have a list. And then we need to search that list. So long... ...how long does it take... ...to actually... ...search... ...the list successfully? Well, it takes until we hit x. That means... ...we have to take... ...as many steps... ...as there are elements... ...before... ...x in the list... ...plus... ...x itself. ...right? So... ...searching successfully... ...successfully... ...successfully... ...in t... ...of h... ...of k... ...takes... ...as much time... ...to... ...as much time... ...there are... ...elements... ...up to x... ...up to x... ...in... ...the list... ...t... ...of h... ...of x. ... ...the next time... ...so when we get the first hash collision... ...on that position... ...we put the new element... ...in front... ...of the list... ...then... ...the next time... ...we get a hash collision... ...we put the next element... ...in front... ...of the list... ...and so on. So that basically means... ...um... ...we have to calculate... ...the expected number of elements... ...that are put... ...into the position... ...th... ...to... ...th... ...of k... ...after... ...we've put in x... ...because... ...those are the ones... ...that end up in front of x... ...and those are the ones... ...that we have to... ...jump... ...when we search... ...for x... ...right? So... ...we have to calculate... ...the expected... ...value... ...so we need to calculate... ...to calculate... ...to calculate... ...the expected number... ...of elements... ...that are inserted... ...in position... ...t... ...of h of x... ...in position... ...t... ...of h of x... ...after... ...x... ...because... ...those are the ones... ...that we need to jump... ...so what we usually do... ...is... ...we use an indicator... ...random variable... ...to... ...describe that... ...and... ...so... ...what is... ...the indicator... ...random variable... ...random variable... ...so it's a random variable... ...that has three indices... ...it has an index i... ...it has an index j... ...and it has an index q... ...so what is... ...i... ...and q... ...it is one... ...so it's the indicator... ...function of... ...we search... ...for... ...x... ...i... ...this is what the index i says... ...for... ...x... ...i... ...this is what the index i says... ...then... ...what we want to have is... ...the age... ...of... ...key i... ...is q... ...and... ...h... ...of... ...key j... ...is also q... ...so we have a... ...cache collision... ...between the elements... ...x... ...x... ...i... ...so what is the probability... ...that this happens? Well we know... ...every element is... ...has the same likelihood... ...so what is the probability... ...of... ...x... ...i... ...q... ...being one? Well it's first... ...the chance... ...that we actually look for... ...x... ...i... ...which is one over n... ...because we've said... ...that we look for all the elements... ...with equal... ...probability. And it's completely independent... ...on what happens... ...so the probability... ...that the key i... ...is equal to q... ...is one over n... ...and since it's independent... ...the probability that... ...the key j... ...is also equal to q... ...is also one over m... ...so this is one over n... ...times m squared... ...which of course means... ...by what we've seen about... ...indicator random variables... ...that the expected value... ...of... ...x... ...i... ...j... ...q... ...is also one over n... ...times m squared... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
