So, next lecture for today. Just a second, still have some difficulties technical. Yesterday we started discussing greedy algorithms. The first example that we were discussing was room scheduling. So we have a room and we fixed three times and we want to schedule our known possible, I don't know, meetings or whatever we have in the room and we want to maximize the number of meetings that we can pack into the room. And we've seen yesterday that this can always be solved by a so-called greedy algorithm, which always takes the best looking choice at the moment. So the best looking choice at the moment for the room scheduling was that we said, well, you know, if we take the meeting that ends first, then this automatically leaves as much space in the room as possible. Of course, we could do it the other way around as well. We could also say we take the meeting that begins last and do it the other way around. So, that's totally symmetric. And then yesterday we've been talking about coding sequences of letters or sequences of blocks or whatever. And the blocks or letters had different frequencies. So this was the important new ingredient. So we had letters of various frequencies and I wrote them down as being A equals to 45, B having a frequency as a 45% of all letters are A. So this B, B is 13% of all letters are B, 12% of all letters are C and we had DEF 69 and 5. So 16 were D, 9 were E and 5. And we wanted to encode them in bit strings so that the bit strings don't overlap. So when, as it's called prefix-free code, prefix-free code means that we don't have two code words that actually have the same prefix. So we don't have two code words such that the longer code word completely contains the shorter one. Right? So we want to be able to decode our bit string from the left to the right. And whenever we have finished one that looks like a code word, we say, okay, that's it. We want to take this as the code. So that's not possible that, for example, one code word has the bit string 1101 and the other one has only 11 so that they overlap completely. So we want to have a prefix-free code where we can unambiguously tell which of the words we've just encoded. And of course, the prefix-free code should be in some way be perfect. So nothing of the bits should be missing. And just by thinking about it, if we have such a code, then what has to be true is that every possible code word, every post is a binary tree. So we encode it as a binary tree and in order to make it optimal, the binary tree has to be full in the sense that every node has either no children, so it's a leaf, or it has both children available so that we don't run into nothing if we want to split it up. So we can just remove the node from the tree and get another code that has one step less, one bit less. So if we have a tree, yesterday we said we encode the tree by using zeros and ones along the edges. And so the leaves are the letters. So let's say this is the A, this is the B, this is the C, this is the D, this is the E. So now assume that we have an E here and we have an F here. And this node here, so that the left ones are the zeros, the right ones are the ones. Just assume that this tree contains a node that doesn't have both children. So by the binary tree delete operation, we could just remove the node from the tree and still get a correct tree and still get a correct code. So that tells us that E and F would be encoded shorter if we just removed that node. And so just by that argument, it shows that every code that perfectly compactly encodes our blocks or our letters has to be in a tree that is completely full. So that means that every node has two children or none. So is a leaf or has two children. And of course, then that also means that all the blocks that we have or all the letters that we have appear as leaves at the end of the tree. So the number of leaves of the tree has to be equal to the number of blocks that we want to encode. We don't want to go anywhere because otherwise we could also compactify it and get rid of the leaves that are actually not in our code. And so the question now is how could we construct such a tree? In order to understand that, what we need to do is we first need to figure out what the cost is for the tree is for the tree because we have a fixed string of letters or blocks and we want to find the code that stores them as compactly as possible. So this is a compression question. Now, how can we store it as compact as possible? Now, what is the cost of storing all of our data? Well, of course, in that case, let's calculate it here. So here, A would be 000, B would be 001, C would be 010, D would be 011, E would be 11. Well, yeah, we've just said that we removed that one to make it as compact as possible. So E would be 10 and F would be 11, right? And as you can see, the code is indeed prefix-free. So none of the 10 doesn't appear anywhere there and the 11 also doesn't appear anywhere there, which is just because everything on the left here of the root starts with a 0 and everything on the right starts with a 1. So that's why we don't have any overlapping code words. Okay, now, what would be the cost of storing all the information using that tree? Like, so what would they have to store? We would have to store 45 zeros, so 45 times 000. Then we would have to store 13 times 001. Then we had to store 12 times 010 and so on, which means that we have to store 45 times 3 bits, plus 13 times 3 bits, plus 12 times 3 bits, plus D16 times 3 bits, plus 9 times 2 bits, plus 9 times, plus 5 times 2 bits, right? So this would be the amount of storage that tree would need. And so how could we write this down as a formula? Well, the height of the node is the important factor here. So the full cost for the whole tree is therefore the frequency of the letter, so that's the sum overall blocks, the frequency of the block times the height in the tree, right? Times the height in the tree. That would be the cost actually. That's called dt of B, okay? So the depth of the node in the tree. Okay, so this has to be minimized. And Huffman, that's why the code is named after Huffman, actually constructed the code with the greedy algorithm. Okay, so how does this greedy algorithm work and what is the idea behind it? Well, the idea was to understand that things that are very rare can have longer bit strings than things that are not so rare. And so what did Huffman think? Well, it says, let's construct a Huffman code for the six elements over there. So the idea was, well, you know, five and nine are the rarest occurrences there. And so it doesn't matter if they have the longest bit strings, right? So what we do is we say that E and F just differ by the last bits. So whatever length we code have, the two least frequent ones shall differ by the last bits. That basically means if they only differ by the last bits, then E and F would sit in a structure like that. Because that's the last bit. So that's the first step. So the first step says, okay, we have an A, we have a B. So the A frequency is 45. The B frequency is 13. The C frequency is 12. The D frequency is 16. The E frequency is 9. And the F frequency is 5. And I'm now drawing the tree from top to bottom. It's easier for me. Okay. So the idea was they should only differ. They're the least frequent ones. So they should only differ in the last bits. But that basically means that we take these two together. We get the 0 to the E. We get the 1 to the F. And then how many nodes pass through that one? Well, all the E's and all the F's pass through that node. So this node will get weight 14 because that's 5 and 9. And then we can think about what is the next step. Well, what are the two least frequent now? Well, the two least frequent now are 12 and 13. So just looking at 14, 16, 12, 13 and 45, we think what is the next best choice for thing only differing in the last bit. And the last two are C and B, which are 12 and 13. And so we just take those two and produce a new node. And the new node has overall weight 25 because it has to step through C and through B. And well, the B gets the 0, the C gets the 1 because the B is bigger than the C. And that's it. Now we have now we are down to four nodes. A 14 node, a 16 node, a 25 node and a 45 node. And we just ignore everything that was before. And now the best choice in our moment is, well, you know, the 14 and the 16 are the least frequent ones. So it's good if they only differ by one bit. And so let's take these two because those are the least frequent ones and put them together. And 16 and 14 is 30. No, 16 is bigger than 14. Yeah, so it gets the 0 and the 14 gets the 1. Okay, great. Now we're down to three nodes. We're down to a 25 node and to a 45 node and to a 30 node. Well, the ones that are least frequent are the 25 and the 30. Right, so greedy. The locally best choice now for these three nodes, of course, if we take the 25 and the 30, and put them together and get a 55 node. Right? And the 55 node, the 30 is bigger. So this has the 0, this has the 1. And, well, we are only left with two nodes. So we only have one choice, which is to put those two together. So we have a 45 node. So we have a 45 node. 50 is bigger. So we have a 0 and a 1. And this would be a 3. Now, let's calculate the cost of that tree when we encode. Well, let's see. This is 100. So this is the full 100% of all elements are there. Now, let's look at what a string, encoding a string would do. Well, it would insert 45 ones, right? For all the A's. So we have 45 bits for the A's. Plus. What about the B's? All the B's are 0, 1, 0. So we have to take 13 bits. So we have 13 times 3 for the B's. The C also takes 3. So 0, 1, 1 is C. And so it's 12 times 3 is the C. Now, let's look at the D. The D takes 0, 0, 0, which is also 3 bits. So it's 16 times 3 is the D. And the E and the F both take 4. Because the E is 0, 0, 1, 0. And F is 0, 0, 1, 1. So we have 9 times 4 plus 9 times 5. Ah, yeah. No, so 9 times 9. Sorry. It's 9 times 9. No, 9 times 4 plus 5 times 4. Sorry. Okay. So this is the number of bits that it takes. Now, shall I calculate that? Well, let's see. 45 plus 39 is 0. 84 plus 36 is exactly 120. And plus 48 is 168 plus 36 is 204. So this is the number that we will get in bits to encode all the blocks. Another question is, there was a very simple algorithm, right? So we only sorted somehow the frequencies and then we always took two together that with the least frequencies. So how could we actually implement that? And the idea is to use a priority queue. So we already know what a priority queue is. And I'm trying to find the algorithm. So this is here. So let's look at the simple algorithm of constructing the Huffman code. Oh, come on. Where is it going? It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. It's not going to write a quote. Oh, yeah. Yes, come on. Okay, so here we are. So what does it do? Well, it uses a priority queue that is initialized with all the data that we have, and then it goes through the number of elements minus one. So what does it do? It produces a new node, and it extracts the two elements of the priority queue that are minimal. So we take the two minimal elements, and then the new node will be, one of them will be the left, one of them will be the right. So you can choose any, but often in Huffman codes, you choose the bigger one for the left and the smaller one for the right, but it doesn't matter. You can just take any two and then you add up the two frequencies. That's what we did. And then you put the new element back into the priority queue. Right. And so by doing this regularly, you're sure that always the two, you can always pick the last ones. And that's it. So that's very simple. Why? We don't have to do anything, but always take the best choice locally. And the question is, is this actually really an optimal tree? Or could we get something better? Right. So it wouldn't be optimal if it wouldn't be true, I wouldn't present it likely. But we need to understand why this choice is indeed optimal. So let's figure out why this is the case. And this will tell us a bit why we can do greedy choices and how the greedy choices work and things like that. So the first thing we already argued is, and I basically proved it by an argument, is that what we already know is that the tree has to be full. So all the blocks that we want to encode have to be leaves and there cannot be any node that doesn't have two children. Because if it has only one children, we can just remove the node from the tree and get still a code that is prefix-free, which is shorter. So if the code is somewhat shortest, the tree has to be full. So this is the first thing we know. And what we want to show is that an optimal prefix-free code has the so-called greedy choice property. So what is the greedy choice property? Greedy choice property basically says that if you take the best choice locally, then you always will get a global optimal solution. So when you remember, in order to do dynamic programming, we said our problem does have to have the best choice. So we have the property that whenever we cut, whenever we look at the optimal solution of something, and then we take a subproblem of that and look at the subproblem, then the optimal solution will also be an optimal solution for the subproblem, just restricted to the subproblem. So this was always the case when we did the matrix multiplication, when we did the room scheduling. So we always knew that the optimal choice will have an optimal subproblem as well. And this is the first thing that you need also to prove that greedy algorithms produce the optimal. But they need a second ingredient. The second key ingredient is the greedy choice property. And the greedy choice property says that you will always get an optimal solution whenever you take the local best choice that you can make. And this will at the end produce an optimal solution. So we didn't get to date, but I think in the next exercises sheet, there is a counter example to be searched for the matrix multiplication problem. So that the matrix multiplication problem does not have the greedy choice property. So you cannot just say, let's see, I'm picking the k for which the pi minus one, so that the number, the dimension of the left matrix times the dimension of the middle matrix times the dimension of the right matrix is minimal. This would be the greedy choice for the matrix multiplication, right? So we don't look for all the subproblems, but in every subproblem, we take the matrix split such that that matrix multiplication is smallest. This is false. This does not lead to an optimal solution. However, if a problem has the greedy choice property, then this is exactly what we can do. So a greedy algorithm always produces the optimal solution if a greedy choice leads to a global optimum. Now, in order to give you an example of the difference between these two questions, these two properties, the other properties is by doing the following example. Okay, so we are a thief. That's always good. So we want to steal something. So we've just broken into a company. And we have a big sack where we can put in all our stuff. So we put in the stuff in the sack. And we have a choice among many different things that we can actually steal. Okay. So the first thing is we have maybe a TV set or I don't know, jewelry or whatever, right? So every one of the items that we can fetch has a weight, right? So everyone has a weight. So we have a sack and we have items. Yeah, one, two, n with n items available. And every item has a weight, wi, every item i has a weight wi and a value. So, we have a weight, right? And we or our sack depending, so we might be infinitely strong, but the sack isn't. Or the sack is infinitely strong, but we aren't. So what we do have is a weight budget, right? So we can only carry out stuff that we can actually carry. So there is a weight budget, which is big W is the weight budget. Now, what do we want to do? Of course, what we want to do is we want to maximize. We want to maximize the value stolen. So what is the value stolen? Well, this is the sum over all i in s in the sack or all items that are actually in the sack of ci, right? This is the sum of the value that we steal. But what we need to do is we subject to st in optimization is the abbreviation for subject to, which tells us we have a constraint and the constraint is the maximal weight, which is all the elements that in the sack of wi has to be small or equal big w, right? Otherwise, we couldn't carry the sack or the sack would rip open and spill out everything. Or we couldn't run fast enough to avoid the dogs or whatever. So there is a weight budget. Now, the question is how can we solve that? Of course, what we need to do is we need to choose the subset s of all the items one to n, right? So this is the first question. The next day, we think that we're doing something better than before because sometimes we were very successful. So what we could do with our first coup, we could buy a truck, okay? And things are better if we actually break into other things. So we take our truck and we go to another company. The other company has valuables that are not yet processed, right? So they have a small mountain of gold nuggets, small ones, and they have a mountain of, I don't know, precious stones, diamonds, whatever. And we have the same problem. So we can use their own caterpillar to load our truck. And then we want to take out as many valuables as possible. So we have the same problem, right? So the same problem is, or almost the same problem. So we have our truck. And also the truck has a weight budget. But in contrast to breaking into flat where we can only take a whole TV, we won't cut the TV in two. It wouldn't be as valuable afterwards, right? So we either take the whole TV set or nothing. And here we have a choice, right? We don't have to put all of the gold nuggets on our truck. We can only take half of them or a quarter of them, right? So we have a specific amount of goods. So here we have the same thing, but it looks a bit different. So what we do is we produce the sum over all items. So from I equals one to N. And then we choose the amount we take, right? So we just choose the amount of gold or the amount of valuables that we take. So this is the amount. So XI is the amount taken. Okay. So and the amount taken times the cost. So this is XI times the cost is what we want to maximize, right? So this is what we get. And what is the weight? The weight is I equals one to N of XI times WI. And this has to be small or equal W. So here we have a very similar problem. Like we load our truck with amounts of stuff. And what we get is the amount times the cost per unit. And the weight will be amount times the weight per unit. And this will then be capped by the weight limit of our truck. Now this looks a bit different than the problem we had over there. But we can transform that problem to that problem. How could we transform them? Well, we just also introduce an artificial amount up there. So let me take a piece of chalk. A red piece of chalk. So we also add an XI here. And don't sum over S. But we also sum from 1 to N. And this is the same here. So we sum, except for the S, we sum from 1 to N. And we enter an XI here. But the only difference is we only can take full or none. That means the second constraint is that XI is in the set 0 and 1 for all the I's. So we have to either take nothing or take everything. Down there, we don't have the restriction. We can take a part of it. And if we reorganize that properly, then we can say XI is in the interval 0 and 1. Either we can take nothing, we can take everything, we can take half of it, we can take a quarter of it, whatever we like. Okay? So these two problems look very much the same. There is only one slight difference. This is here the XI is either nothing or everything. And here we can choose among the XI's how much we want to take. Right? So the interesting problem there, by the way, the problems are called, this is a so-called 0-1 knapsack problem. And this is a problem class you will encounter very often if you do data science. Knapsack problems are very, very frequent. And this is a fractional knapsack problem. So this is called a fractional knapsack. Well, we did a knap truck, but never mind. Okay. Okay. So now we want to solve these two problems. And the question is, how do the solution methods actually, how could we solve them? Which of them is the easier one? What do you think? Without reading the book, just by guessing. The first one is the easier one. Okay. Why? Because you have fewer choices. So you have infinitely many choices in the second case, but you have only two choices in the first case. So that looks very much like the first problem is the simpler one, right? Well, wrong. Why? Because you can solve the second problem by a greedy algorithm to global optimality. And how does the greedy algorithm work? Well, the idea is the following. So, every element that we want to steal has a cost to weight ratio. Yeah. So for all I in 1 to N, we calculate the cost to weight ratio. Right. Because this is important for us. We have a weight budget. And so the greedy choice would be to take the stuff that is most valuable per pound or per kilogram, right? And then continue from there. So what is the cost to weight ratio? Well, it's of course the cost divided by the weight of the unit. So we take the cost to weight ratio and then we just choose as much of the element with the highest cost to weight ratio as we can choose. And how can we distinguish that? Well, we have only one budget which is the weight. And so the idea is if WI is actually smaller equal the weight budget that we have, we set XI to 1. So, if I has the highest rhoi. If I has the highest rhoi, we just check where we can put everything in there. If we can put everything in there, we just take everything. Otherwise, we just take as much as we can get else XI will be W divided by WI. And that's it. So that's the amount we take. And then we put all of this into a big loop. And the big loop says then we have a new element. And the new thing is we update W and remove what we've just done. So we multiply XI by WI and we iterate that loop until W is 0 because then we've gone. So the rest W is 0. So we take as much of the most valuable per weight if this doesn't block everything we have. Then we take the next and so on. And this produces an optimal value. Okay, now let's do the same for the 0.1 knapsack problem. We could also do it there, right? We could also do it to try to solve the first one with the same algorithm. But it's very simple to show that this doesn't work. Why? Because, let's see, we have a budget of 50 kilos. So let's 0.1 knapsack. So, W shall be 50. So we have 50 kilos given. And we have only three items. So item 1 has a weight and has a value. So item 1, item 2, item 3. So item 1 weighs 10 kilos and has a value of 60 euros. Item 2 weighs 20 kilos and has a value of 100 euros. And item 3 has 30 kilos and weighs 120 euros. Now let's calculate our ratios row. Okay, so 1 weighs 6 euros per kilo. So it has a weight, cost as a value to weight ratio of 6. Item 2 has a value to weight ratio of 5 euros per kilo. And 3 is 4 euros per kilo, right? Well, let's see. What would the greedy choice tell us? Well, the greedy choice would tell us that we will take item 1, right? So, the first item we take is 1, which is this 1. And that means that we put item 1 into the sack, which leaves a weight budget of 40. That means we can take any of the 2. The one that has the highest weight ratio is item 2, which has 5 euros per kilo. So we took 1 and 2. And then the remaining weight that we can carry is 20. And we can't fit the third item into our sack. So that means we take items 1 and 2. And so we get 160 euros out during our break-in. Right? Now, we could have taken though, what is the global optimum? The global optimum is to take 2 plus 3. Because 2 plus 3 has just 50 kilos and we would have gotten 220 euros. That means that this problem does not have the greedy choice property. So we can't just take the greedy choice. Right? So what we can do is we can solve it by dynamic programming. That means that we take any of them and calculate the remaining budget and take the others. So it has the optimal substructure problem. So we can solve it by dynamic programming. But we cannot solve it by greedy choice. And so the question is that we have to ask ourselves, does the Huffman code have the greedy choice property? So is this true that for prefix recalls we can have the greedy choice property? And there is a lemma that says that this is indeed so. So optimal prefix recalls have the greedy choice property, which is the first lemma that we want to prove. So lemma 15.2. So let's see, let's see, be an alphabet. This is what the blocks that we want to encode is called. So the amount of things we want to encode is always called an alphabet encoding theory. In which each character. And an element of the alphabet is called a character. And character C in C has frequency. C dot frequency. Let X and Y. B the two characters. With lowest frequencies. Then there exists an optimal prefix-free code. An optimal. Prefix-free. Code. An optimal. Prefix-free. Code. For C. In which. X. And Y. Have the same length. The code words. So the code words. The code words. Are the bit strings that we have. The code words. of X. In which. X. In which. X. And Y. Y. And Y. Have the same length. In which. The code words. In which. The code words. In which. The code words. So the code words. Are the bit strings that we have. The code words. Of X. And Y. Have the same length. And X. And Y. Differ only. In the last bit. So this is exactly. The greedy choice. We took. Right? So this is exactly. What we did. So we. Took the two. Which had. The. The lowest frequency. We. Put them. Into a subtree. And we made. Sure. That they only differ. In one bit. And so. This is the greedy choice. We took. So if we can prove. That. Then. We prove. That. Indeed. The optimal. Prefix free codes. Have. The greedy choice. Property. Okay. So let's prove that. Well. The idea is. We've seen. That we can. Do. A prefix free code. In a tree. And. So what we want. To. Is. We want. To start. With. A prefix free code. That is. Optimal. So we want. To. A tree. That is. An optimal. Prefix free code. And what we want. To show. Is that. We can. Change. That tree. Without. Destroying. The optimality. Property. So that afterwards. X and Y. Have that property. That they only differ. In one bit. And. They basically. Jason to each other. So let. T. Therefore. Be. The tree. For. An optimal. Prefix free. Code. So let's. Start with that. Um. Now. Let's. Take. Two. Elements. From our. Alphabet. So let. A. And. B. B. B. So let. A and. B. B. And. C. Uh. Be. Two. Um. Characters. That. Are. Leafs. Uh. And. Are. Are. Uh. Two. Um. Characters. That. Are. Leafs. Uh. Of. Maximal. Depth. In T. In T. That. Are. Siblings. Since they're of maximal depth they both have to be. Leafs. And. Siblings means that they just share a parent. And. So let's assume. That we take any and they have to exist right. So if you have a tree. We have to find two. Um. That are leaves and adjacent to each other. In the end of the tree. And so let's take any two of them. Now. Um. What we do know. Is that. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. That. without loss of generality, by just renumbering them, that the frequency of A is small or equal the frequency of B. So they have to be ordered, otherwise we call A B and B A, doesn't matter. So what can we conclude from there? Well, just by using these two inequalities and the fact that X is the smallest one, this definitely implies that X dot frequency has to be small or equal A dot frequency and that Y dot frequency has to be small or equal B dot frequency. We can't say that Y has to be small or equal A dot frequency because A could be X. But these two have to be true, right? So since B is greater or equal to A and X and Y are the two smallest, these two inequalities have to be true. So if X dot frequency is equal to B dot frequency, then what we definitely know is that A dot frequency is also the same and B and Y dot frequency is also the same. So let's write this down. So if X dot frequency is equal to B dot frequency, this implies that X dot frequency is equal to Y dot frequency is equal to A dot frequency is equal to B dot frequency. So this is just because X and Y are the two smallest ones. Okay, so the next thing we do is we take two exchanges, right? So we produce first, we have a tree T and from the tree T we construct the T T prime by just exchanging X and A. So we exchange X with A. And the new tree is called T prime. We don't have any other properties but being a binary tree that is full, so we can just relabel them. We keep the tree structure as it is. We just relabel X, Y, we relabel X, A and AX, right? So we just like here, up there, we would just exchange, let's see, the F and the B, for example. We just exchange the two, right? So this new tree will be called T prime. And then we take a second exchange, we would exchange Y and B. And then we get a tree T double prime. Okay, so what does T double prime have as a property with respect to X and Y? Well, X is now in the place where A was before and Y is now in the place where B was before. But A and B were two adjacent children of maximal depth, so they only differ in one bit, which is the last bit, and they were siblings. So in T double prime, X and Y have exactly the properties we request in the lemma. So in T double prime, X and Y are siblings whose code words only differ in the last bit. So in T double prime, X and Y is the first one. Okay, great. Now, let's calculate B of T, B of T prime and B of T double prime. So B of T is known because that's optimal. B of T is minimal. So this is something we know because we chose an optimal code to start with. So we cannot get smaller than B of T. So now what we need to understand is how does T prime change? So let's compute the difference of B of T and B of T prime. So how does this work? Well, we know that's the sum over all code words C of the frequency of C. So this is C dot frequency times the depth in the tree T of C minus the sum over all the code words C dot frequency, which doesn't change, times the depth in T prime of C. So we didn't change. times the depth in t of c minus the depth in t prime of c. Okay, so we didn't change all the code words except for a and x. All the others stay the same, right? So only x and a were exchanged, all the others are the same, which means that this difference is zero for all except for a and x, right? So what is this then? This is then a dot frequency times the depth in the 3t of a minus the depth in the t prime of a plus x dot frequency in the depth in t of x minus the depth in t prime of x. Everything else is zero because all the other depth hasn't changed. Now, what do we know about these numbers? We've just exchanged a and x, but that means that the depth in t prime of x is the same as the depth in t of a. So this is the same as a dot frequency times. So we have the depth in t of a minus the depth in t prime of a, but the depth in t prime of a is the depth in t of x. So this is the depth in t of a, because we've exchanged them. So this is the depth in t of a, and this is now the same. So we can factor out that factor, which tells us that this is a dot frequency times. So this is a dot frequency times times. Here we have the depth in t of x minus the depth in t prime of x. But the depth in t prime of x is the depth in t of a. So this is the depth in t of a, because we've exchanged them. So this is d t of a, and this is now the same. So we can factor out that factor, which tells us that this is a dot frequency minus x dot frequency times d t of a minus d t of x. Right? But now d t of a was maximal. That means that this factor has to be non-negative. Because d t a had maximal depth, so x couldn't have a larger depth, could have the same, but not a larger one. So this is non-negative. But x is the one that has a smaller frequency than a, meaning that this factor is also greater or equal to zero, making the product greater or equal to zero. That means, though, that means that b t prime. That means that b t has to be greater or equal to b t prime. But b t is already minimal. That says that b t prime has to be the same as b t. So now I need a blackboard. So this implies that b t is equal to b t prime. And then we do the same calculation again for x and for y, which is essentially again the same calculation. So the same calculation calculation for y and b shows that b t prime is equal to b t double prime. And since b t prime is equal to b t, this is also equal to b t. And that means that we're finished because we've just shown that there exists a code in which x and y are siblings and only differ in the last bit. Okay, so this was the first step. So we do know that it does have the greedy choice property. What I did not prove yet is that optimal prefix-free codes also have the optimal substructure property. That's something I proved by hand-waving. Let's now prove it really, which is lemma 15.3, optimal substructure. So we've shown the greedy choice property. Now we have to do the optimal substructure property. So let's assume that we have an alphabet like before. So let's see b as in lemma 15.2. So all the prerequisites that we have there are there. And x and y as well. So let x and y and c x y. So those are the two with the lowest frequencies. So now let's c prime b, c without x and y union z. So we remove from c the subset x y and we add a z. Let a be in c prime without z. Then a dot frequency and I will now write it here. A dot frequency in c prime. So the c prime frequency shall be the c frequency of a. Okay. Okay. And the frequency of z. Okay. And the frequency of z. Okay. And the frequency of z. c prime. And c prime shall be the c prime. And c prime shall be the c prime. The frequency of x plus the c prime. The frequency of y. Let t prime be any tree. Let t prime be any optimal prefix-free code tree. Let t prime. Let t prime be any optimal prefix-free code tree. Let t prime be any optimal prefix-free code tree. Let t prime. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let t write a quote. Let or by inserting, x and y, as children of said, is an optimal prefix-free code 3 code 3 for C, which is exactly the construction we take in the Huffman code. So, the idea is we take an optimal prefix-free code that constructed from T' and then we have somewhere one of the leaves has to be our node Z, which is the new element in the alphabet C'. And the only thing we do is this has to be a leaf and what we do is we just put x and y as children of that leaf, which gets us a new tree where now x and y are children, Z is removed. And what we say is that this is an optimal prefix-free code 3 for the old alphabet. Okay, now, how can we do that? Well, let's prove that. What we need to do is we need to calculate B . So, we know that B is minimal among all the trees for the alphabet C', but we need to calculate how B looks like. Okay, so what is B ? B as before. That's the sum over all code words in C of C.frequency times the depth in T of C. Now, let's write this a bit different because we are actually not interested in most code words. We are mostly interested in x and in y. So, let's look at the following sum. This is all C's that are not in x and y, that are not x and y of C.frequency times the depth of C plus x.frequency times the depth in T of x plus y.frequency times the depth in T of y, right? And this is still the same sum, just written a bit differently. Okay, so what do we know from the construction? Well, this is the same as the sum over all C in C without x and y of C.frequency times the T of C, which hasn't changed. Now, what do we know? No, we do know that DT of x and DT of y is actually the same because both of them are children of Z. And so, DT of x and DT of y is the depth of Z plus 1. So, this is therefore plus x.frequency plus y.frequency. We can factor them out because they have the same depth times the depth in T' of Z plus 1. Because this is exactly what we have. Now, if we look at that sum here, both of these elements have the same position in T as they have in T' because we haven't changed them. and the frequencies are also the same. So this is therefore equal to the sum C in C without X and Y of C dot frequency times DT prime of C plus an X dot frequency plus Y dot frequency Z dot frequency times DT prime of Z plus one. Now, if you multiply that out, we have Z dot frequency times DT prime of Z, which is the same as this one, which says that this is the sum over all characters in C prime, because this is the only one which is added, of C dot frequency times the depth in D prime of C plus, and there is something which is still there, and what is still there is X dot frequency plus Y dot frequency, because this is Z dot frequency. So, and this is B of T prime. So this is B of T prime plus X dot frequency plus Y dot frequency. So that means that the cost of T of the tree T is the cost of the tree T prime plus the frequencies of X and Y. Okay, now, this is the most important thing, and this somehow already tells us that this has to be optimal. In some sense, because we have to add two leaves somewhere. This is something we can't avoid. Now, let's take an indirect proof for proving that this is optimal. Assume that it is not optimal. Assume that T is not optimal. Well, if it is not optimal, then there exists a code tree T double prime such that B of T double prime is smaller than B of T. So, let's take an indirect proof for proving that B of T. Well, it has to. Now, without loss of generality meaning by lemma 15.2, Without loss of generality, X and Y are siblings that only of maximal depth. Of maximal depth in T''. This is basically what we proved there. Okay, now what we do now is we construct a new tree, a new tree which is called T''. Let T'' be the tree where we remove X and Y and label their parent Z. Okay, so we assume that the tree T is not optimal so that we get a better one, T''. And without loss of generality, what we just proved in Lemma 15.2, in that tree X and Y are siblings and have maximal depth. And what we now do is we remove the two children, the X and Y and replace them by their parent and we call the parent Z. So then T''. Then T''. Is a prefix-free code tree. Is a code tree. For the alphabet Z''. For the alphabet Z''. Because X and Y are gone but Z is there. Now, let's compute B''. Now, let's compute B''. So, it's quite simple to calculate that B'', by the same calculation as before, is the same as B'', minus X.frequ. minus Y.frequency, minus Y.frequency. That's the same calculation as just before. But this is strictly smaller than B of T minus X.frequency, minus Y.frequency. Because we've just said that B''. Because we've just said that B''. is smaller than B''. But B' minus X.frequency, minus Y.frequency is by the calculation we just did before, the same as B''. But this is a contradiction because we said that B''. is optimal. And now we found another tree that has a strictly smaller tree budget. So, this is a contradiction which says that indeed T was optimal to begin with and we've finished with our proof. And the theorem which is an obvious consequence of these two things, theorem 15.4 is a Huffman code. So, this is a contradiction which is an optimal prefix-free code. Which is just what we proved. So, the algorithm that we just presented always produces an optimal prefix-free code. Okay. So, this ends the presentation of chapter 15. And we now move to new data structures. So, the next interesting, the next chapter will be 17 in the book. Which is about augmenting data structures with new functionality. And afterwards we will do tree operations. Among them the most important trees of them all nowadays which are B-trees. Okay. So, which is really the most important. So, B-trees will be afterwards. B-trees are probably the most important trees among all of them nowadays in data science. Okay. So, next section is chapter 15. Chapter 17, sorry. Which is augmented data structures. What do you mean by augmented data structures? Well, basically we've done this already. We've already done an augmentation of a data structure without mentioning it. And so, what did we do when we introduced red-black trees? When we introduced red-black trees, what we did is we took binary trees, binary search trees, and we added a new property which was the red-black property of every node. And using these properties we showed how to update the properties and things like that. What did not spoil was the property of binary search tree that searching, inserting, and things like that only depend on the height of the tree. Right? So, this is a property of binary search trees that we didn't spoil. But we added a new data structure which is the color and then we showed how to keep the color updated. Now, since red-black trees are so important data structures, nobody really sees them as an augmented binary tree. Or some do, but that's not really discussed a lot. So, what we will do is we will next add, we will next augment red-black trees in order that they provide us with more information about the elements stored. So, if you remember, we had, and this is something you will face more frequently than you think, right? We have an out-of-the-box data structure and you will have to add new functionality to it. So, sometimes, so augmenting a data structure does not mean to add a pointer to data. So, this is trivial and this is something we've discussed and said we don't do anymore because it's so easy. Augmenting a data structure means you add new functionality to the data structure by just adding specific new information about it. And the first example of such a thing is, if you remember, we've been talking about order statistics, right? So, we have an array and order statistics means we don't want to only get the maximal element or the minimal element, but we want to have the i-th largest element or we want to know for an element the rank of the element in the list. Like, is it the 17th? Is it the 19th? Or whatever. So, how can we get this information fast? We've seen an algorithm in chapter 9 that we can take, if we have an unsorted array, we can take an order of n operation to get every order statistic for any element in this unordered set. Now, we know how to order properly, so maybe we can get it faster. And there is a way to get it in order of log n time by producing a red-black tree. Now, the red-black tree itself does not provide you with the information to calculate the order statistics. So, what we need to do is we need to augment the red-black tree with additional information in order to get enough information for calculating the order statistics fast. And so, what is the idea? The idea is to produce a tree as it is projected in a second, which is basically now. Of course, I forgot to switch back to whatever, anyway. So, which is here. Now, let's look at the tree. This is a red-black tree, as always. It is filled with many keys already. And we have additional numbers over there. So, as you can see, the numbers grow from the bottom to the top. And so, what does each number represent? If you calculate, every number below the key represents the number of elements the subtree rooted at that specific node has. So, every leaf has number one, because there is only one in the subtree starting with the leaf. And, for example, the red 10 on the left-hand side contains the number 4, which counts for the 10, the 7, the 12, and the 3. And the 17 has 12 nodes below it. And the whole tree contains 20 nodes, which is what the root node tells us. So, we've added a new information to the red-black tree, which is the size of the subtree. Now, the question is, how can we, A, produce this information, but more importantly, if we add a new node or remove a node, how can we update the size information in the red-black tree properly? Right? So, this is the question, how does it help us? Does it help us at all? So, this is the question, how can we get other statistics from a tree that has that information? Okay. Now, where is, where are you, where are you, where are you, where are you? Okay. Now, what we want to do is we want to figure out what, for example, the rank is of an element. So, let's see, this is the calculation of the rank of an element. Let's think this algorithm through. Now, if we are at the point, what we can calculate simply because we've stored it is the rank of the element itself in the whole tree. Because we know that all the elements, when we're sitting at a node, all the elements that are smaller than this element are in the left subtree. That's the property of a search tree, right? So, all the elements that are smaller are in the left subtree, which means the size of the left subtree plus one tells us the how manyth element we are. So, our rank is the size of our left subtree plus one, which is the first thing we calculate. Now, the next thing is we look at the parent. So, we just hop up. We want to know the rank of X in the whole tree and not just the rank of X in its subtree. Therefore, we need to know where it is rooted in the whole tree. So, what comes to X in addition? Well, to X in addition, we are always hopping up in the rank when our parent has a left subtree and we are from the right subtree. Because that means that all the elements that are in the left are before us in the sequence. So, therefore, what we need to do is we need to go up and check whether we just came from the right side. Because if we came from the right side, we have to add all the elements that are on the left side to our rank. And this is exactly what this thing is doing. So, it's going up until it hits the root. And then if we came from the right side, we just add all the elements plus the element itself. So, we add to the rank that we had calculated before all the left subtree of the parent plus one for the parent. And then we hop up until we hit the root. And so, how much work is this? Well, it's basically at most order of log n. We have only the height of the tree. We know that the depth of the red black tree is at most order of log n. And we have to take hops up to the parent from where we started. We can start at most at a leaf. So, we have at most logarithm of n hops. And in every hop, we have at most one or two additions. We have at most two additions. So, all together, what we can have at most is an order of log n information. And then we can calculate our rank. So, if we have an element, we can calculate our rank. Now, what happens if we want to select the ith largest element or the ith smallest element? Okay, now let's see. The first thing is we do it recursively. So, what we want to do is we want to check where we start at the root. And we want to check how many of the elements the root is. Right? In the subtree. We know how to do that. We calculate the size of the left subtree and add one. Okay, then. If this is the rank that we are looking for, we just find it. And we just return ourselves. Otherwise, we have two possibilities. Either we search for an element that is before that or we search for an element that is after that. If it's an element that is before that, we have to look in the left subtree and keep where we are. If we are in an element that is bigger, then we look in the right subtree and we subtract where we were before. So, we look for the a i-th element in the right subtree because all the r that we already calculated come before that. Or we go to the left and just search for the i-th element there and that's it. So, this travels down from the root and it travels down at least one step. So, the most traveling it can take is log n again. So, this also searches the i's biggest element in log n steps. And how to update this and how to insert and subtract is something we'll discuss next week. I wish a nice evening and see or afternoon and see you again next week. Bye-bye.
