Okay, now the recording works. Okay, great. So let's start. Sorry for being late, but it's very difficult. So many of you have anyway been in the problem in the exercises class. So I always have the exercises class on Wednesday before this starts and it's quite a way from Oskar Morgensternplatz to here. Well, that doesn't improve the likelihood of being on time. And if the technique also doesn't work, then things get messy. So let's clean the blackboard while I'm giving you a recap of what we are just into now. So we have formulated the master theorem and we've seen a few examples on how the master theorem works and now we are just proving it. So we are trying to figure out why the master theorem is true. We actually have two different lemma to prove first. The first one was already done, which was using the kind of recursion tree to actually prove a formula that involves the number of leaves, which we've already calculated properly. And it also involves a sum for which we have to get an estimate. But in order to estimate the sum, we're just in the midst of proving a second lemma, which I will write down in a second. And this second lemma, somebody wrote on the blackboard while it was still wet. So the chalk sticks really well. In the second lemma, we have three cases. Every one of these cases somewhat corresponds to one of the cases in the master theorem. And we have already proved cases one and two yesterday. I will still usually would write down the whole lemma just for recap reasons. But since we are already so late, I will avoid that. So you can check the lemma in the book. And I will only write down the part of the lemma that we want to prove, which is the third statement, the third case, which is still missing. So what we have is lemma 4.3. I will just ignore the other blackboard. It's lemma 4.3. And in lemma 4.3, we have the constants a and b and our driving function fn. And we have this sum. So we have the g of n formula, which is given by the sum from j equals 0 to the logarithm and f of n. So this is the sum that we want to estimate. And case 3.3 that is still open to prove is if there is a constant. So if there exists a constant between 0 and 1 such that we have the following estimate. 0 is smaller than a fn divided by b. And this in turn is smaller than the constant multiple of f of n. So c times f of n. For some, actually no, for all n. For all n greater or equal to 1, then g of n is theta of f of n. So this is what we want to prove. And this is still open. The other two cases we did yesterday. The proof of case 3. Okay, so usually we start exactly as we did for the other two cases. We just look at our formula and take the definition of our formula. So what we need to prove is that, well, the first thing is that what we can easily see if we write this down, so g of n is the sum j equals 0 to log bn and let's say j equals 1 to log bn of a to the j, f n divided by b to the j plus the term for j equals 0. The term for j equals 0 is f of n. Right, but this automatically, since this is non-negative, this automatically tells us that g of n has to grow at least as fast as f of n. So that already means that g of n is big omega of f of n. So if you want to show that g of n is theta of f of n, we only need to prove that g of n is big O of f of n. So it... Oh, yeah, of course. Sorry. No. Here you are. Sorry. Thanks. So, it remains to show that g of n is big O of f of n. So this is what we need to prove. The other direction is simple. Okay, so how do we get this? Well, this is very simple actually as in contrast to the other problems. So, what we do know is that g of n is this here. So, g of n is equal to the sum j equals 0 to the floor of log bn of a to the j times f of n divided by b to the j. So, but by this inequality and by induction, this is smaller equal to the sum of j equals 0 to log bn of c to the j times f of n. Right? Because f of n over b times a is smaller than c times f of n. So, we can subsequently get out every a and b and sum up the c's and multiply the c's with each other. Well, f of n doesn't depend on j. So, this is equal to f of n times the sum j equals 0 to log bn of c to the j. And if we don't stop summing, this is definitely smaller equal f of n to the sum j equals 0 to infinity of c to the j. And this is a simple geometric sum. So, this is f of n divided by c minus 1 minus c. And 1 minus c is a constant. So, we've proved that g of n is capital O of f of n and together with the omega before that says that g of n is equal to theta of f of n. So, this finishes the proof of the lemma. So, finally, we are done with the lemma. Now, the last thing which is still missing is the master theorem itself. So, let's write this down. Theorem 4.4. Let a be bigger than 0 and b be bigger than 1 be constant. And f of n is equal to n to r as before. Then, if t satisfies the recursion that t is a times t of n over b plus f of n for n bigger than n0. And t of n is equal to theta of 1 for n being smaller equal to n0. Then, we have the following cases. Then, first, if there exists an epsilon bigger than 0 such that f of n is big O of the watershed function, which is n to the log b of a, but minus epsilon. Then, t of n is theta of the watershed function, n to the log b of a. Second, if there exists a constant k that is greater or equal to 0 such that f of n is theta of the watershed function, n to the log b of a times the kth power of the logarithm of a. Then, t of n is theta of n log b of a times the k plus first power of the logarithm of n. This is the second one. Now, the third case says if, now I have two things. If there exists an epsilon bigger than 0 such that f of n is big O of n log b a plus epsilon. If f satisfies this strange condition of the lemma and if f satisfies that there exists a constant c between 0 and 1, this is the so-called regularity condition. So, if there exists an epsilon bigger than a times the f of n. So, if there exists an epsilon bigger than a times the f of n divided by b which itself is smaller than c times f of n. So, if there exists an epsilon bigger than a times the f of n. So, if there exists an epsilon bigger than a times the f of n greater or equal to N. So, if there exists an epsilon bigger than a times the f of n. So, if there exists an epsilon bigger than a times the f of n greater or equal to N. So, if there exists an epsilon bigger than a times the f of n greater or equal to N. Then, t of n is theta of f of n. So, those are the three cases. And, of course, we will use the lemmas that we have proved before to make it sure. So, we have to do two things. First, we have to get the two lemmas together and then we have to correct for the fact that the first lemma only proved this for N0 equals to 1. So, we need to get it true for all N0 and not just for the equals to 1. So, those are the two things that we have to correct for. And, so, the idea is that first we change our functions t and f a small bit. So, we define new functions. So, let t tilde of N be defined as t of N times N0. So, this is the first thing. Then, we also redefine our driving function. We also define an f tilde of N also to be f of N times N0. So, let's calculate the recursion for t tilde and f tilde. Let's get this up and this one down without slipping. Oh, come on. Oops, that was the wrong one. Okay, so, what's the recursion for t? Then, t tilde satisfies. So, what is t tilde of N? Well, t tilde of N is equal to t of N times N0. So, now we can use the recursion for t. If N is greater or equal to 1. So, this is equal to t, sorry, A times t of N times N0 divided by B plus f of N times N0. Oh, well, f tilde of N times N0, right? So, this is easy. This is equal. This is equal by definition. A times t tilde of N times T tilde of N divided by B plus f tilde of N. And this is true for N greater or equal to 1. Because if N is greater or equal to 1, then N times N0 is greater or equal to N0. And that recursion is true for everything or for N bigger than 1. Okay, so this is the first thing. So, if N is greater or equal to 1. Then, t tilde of N is, well, t of N times N0. And this is greater or equal to N0. So, this is theta of 1 by the definition of t, of the recursion of t. So, let's write this down in a compact way. So, t tilde satisfies the relation that t tilde is A times t tilde of N over B plus f tilde of N. For N being bigger than 1 and theta of 1. For N being smaller or equal to 1. So, using that trick, we have eliminated our N0 problem. So, now we are back to our base case 1. Now, we have a recurrence that very much fits lemma 4.2. And that means that by lemma 4.2. We already know that t of N is equal to, t tilde of N, sorry, t tilde of N is equal to theta of the watershed function, which is N to the log B of A plus the long sum, which is J equals 0 to log B A, ah, log BN, A to the J, F tilde of N divided by B to the J. So, this is what our lemma tells us. Now, we need to get three cases. So, what we need to figure out whether if F satisfies case 1, whether if tilde will satisfy F1. So, let's have a look. So, we know, so case 1, F is capital O of the watershed function minus epsilon for some epsilon bigger than 0. So, it's N to the log B A minus epsilon for some epsilon bigger than 0. Okay. Now, let's look at what F tilde looks like. Well, what is F tilde? F tilde is F of N times N0, right? So, now let's plug in what we know. So, F of N, sorry. Let's plug in N0. So, this is capital O of N times N0 to the log epsilon, log B A minus epsilon. Okay. So, let's multiply this out. This is O of N0 to log B A minus epsilon times N to log B A minus epsilon. And so, what we know is that F tilde of N, sorry, F tilde of N also satisfies the same condition. And so, what we can do is we can use now lemma 4.3. Case 1. Because F satisfies exactly what we want to know about case 1. And so, what we have is that T tilde of N is theta of the watershed function, which is N to the log B A. Right? Now, we have to go back to our T. Well, T, but T of N is the same as T tilde of N divided by N0. And T tilde of N divided by N0, therefore, is theta of N to the log B A divided by N0 to the log B A. But by what we had before, this is still a constant and we don't have to care about constants. So, this is N to the log B A. Theta of N to the log B A. And so, case 1 is proved. Okay. So, case 1 was easy. Now, let's look at case 2. This is very similar. So, case 2. In case 2, we have that F of N is theta of N to the log B A times L G. To the K of N for some N greater or equal to N0 and some K greater or equal to 0. Okay. Now, let's look at F tilde of N. This is F of N times N0. This is F of N times N0. So, this is theta of N times N0 to the log B A. And the Kth power of the logarithm of N times N0. And this is true for some N greater or equal to N0 and K greater or equal to 0. So, here we have two parts. We have the logarithm to the power of N times N0. And we have the product over there. So, let's see what that means. This is equal to theta of. Now, we have N times N0. So, this makes an N to the log B A times N0 to the log B A. So, what about logarithms? So, if the logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms, right. So, what we have here is the L G of N plus the L G of N0 to the power of K. So, this is of course equal to theta of N times log B A times L G of N to the power of K times a constant, which is the power of K times log B A times log B A. And now, we have other elements, which is the sum of J equals 0 to K-1 of… of j equals zero to k minus one of, here we have Lgn to the power of j times Lgn0 to the power of k minus j times k over j times n to the log b a times n zero to the log b a. Right? This is writing a power as sum to the power of k, binomial theorem. Okay, what we can see is that all of these powers of the Lgn are smaller than k. So this is a term, if we get rid of the constants, so we can get rid of the n zero log b a constant. So this is theta of n to the log b a times theta by what we've proved. Now here we have Lg to the power of k of n plus this strange sum. j equals zero to k minus one k over j times Lg k minus j n zero times Lg j of n. So this is a polynomial in Lg of n, right? So this is a polynomial in Lg of n, right? And for polynomials, only in the theta, only the highest power counts. In the theta, only the highest power counts. All the other powers are smaller. So therefore, we have to only keep the highest power. So this is again theta and then we can multiply them together again. So this is theta of log b a times Lg to the power kn. So if f is of that structure, then also f tilde has the same asymptotic properties. And therefore, we can use case 2 of lemma 4.3. Case 2. And we get that t tilde of n is theta of the watershed function n log b a times the kth power, k plus first power of the logarithm of n. So this is what our, no, not t tilde, sorry, it's not t tilde. It's the sum that it's, oh, I'm too fast. I'm sorry. That's why I want to keep up with the lost time. And so I forgot to do the proper explanation because that's not what lemma 4.3 really says. Lemma 4.3 says that the sum is of that structure. So how do I, how do I add it here? So add it here. So that says that the sum j equals 0 to log b n of a to the j, f to the n divided by b to the j is of that structure is theta to n. So this is what it really says. Or does it wait? Let me see. I'm a bit, I made a small error. Sorry about that. No, it's capital O of that. So that's what I thought. It's capital O of that. So this is capital O of that. So this is capital O of that. And we already know that the lemma 1 says that t tilde is theta of the watershed function. And this is capital O of the watershed function. And therefore the sum of the two is theta of the watershed function. Okay. So this is really what the lemma says. And this is what we need in order to add it to this term. So just add this one line because this makes these things clearer. And so here we also don't have the t tilde of n instead. So what we really have is that the sum j equals 0 to log b n of a to the j, f of n divided by b to the j is theta of that. So this is what the lemma says. And now in order to prove what t tilde says, we have to sum these two up. So therefore, t tilde of n is theta of n to the log b n, log b a, plus theta of n to the log b a, lg k plus 1. So this is using the lemma and this formula from lemma 4.2. Now, if we sum these two things up, we know that thetas can be summed by summing the contents. So this is n to the log b a, plus n to the log b a, times lg to the k plus 1 n, which is the same as theta. Now we can factor out the n to the log b a, this is n to the log b a, times 1 plus lg to the power of k plus 1 n. So we can ignore the one, we only have to keep the largest factor. And so we have n to the log b a, lg to the power of k plus 1 n. Okay, now we have to transfer that back to our t of n. And so we need to clean the blackboard and write on. So this is for t-tilt. So this is for t-tilt. at the at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at Okay, so next point is we need to get it back to our t of n. So we know that t of n is t tilde of n divided by n0. And so now we go the other way around as before. So we know that this is theta of n divided by n0 to the power of log bA times the LG to the power of k plus 1 of n divided by n0. Now we can do it the same way as before. So this is of course equal to theta of n to the log bA divided by n0 to the log bA and LG and LG n minus LG n0 to the power of k plus 1. And this is again a constant, this is again a polynomial, so I think you can allow me to make a shortcut here. So we get rid of that constant, we get rid of that constant. And so this is theta of n to the log bA times LG n to the power of k plus 1. And so we've proved case 2. And so finally we're up to case 3. And case 3 tells us that our f tilde has our properties of case 3. So let's see what f says. So we have case 3. So we have that f of n is big omega of n to the log bA plus epsilon for some epsilon bigger than 0 and what we also have and we have that there exists an n in the natural numbers such that for all n greater or equal to n we have that. So basically what we have is that a times f of n divided by b is smaller than c times f of n. And this is also bigger than 0 but doesn't matter. So this is what we have. This is the consistency condition. So what we need to factor out, what we need to figure out, what does that means for f tilde. Now of course this implies that f tilde of n which is f of n times n0 is capital, is big omega of n times n0. I write it down right as a product n to the log bA plus epsilon times n0 to the log bA plus epsilon. And this is again a constant. So this is big O of n to the log bA plus epsilon. So this is the first thing we need. The second thing that we need is that this inequality is only true for n large but we need the inequality for every n. So the first thing what we know is that 0 is smaller than a times f of n divided by b, which is equal to a times f tilde. And f tilde is f of n divided by n times n0. So if we write f tilde n divided by b, we have a times f of n times n0 divided by b. And so this will be smaller than c of f tilde of n times n0 which is equal to c times f tilde of n. Which makes things nice but this is only true for all n greater equal n divided by n0. So this is not necessarily true for all n greater or equal to 1. So we need to tweak a bit, right? So what we do know is that if n is smaller than n divided by n0, then we have two numbers. We have a times f tilde of n divided by b is equal to f tilde of n times some constant alpha. Let's call it alpha n, right? So if this is the case, then this is a number and this is a number. So we can basically divide the two, right? And so we anyway want the function to be positive. So this means alpha n is equal to a times f tilde of n divided by b divided by alpha n. at the at the at the at the at the at the at the at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at And if we take c tilde, then we have that 0 is smaller than a times f tilde of n divided by b. And this is smaller than c tilde times f of n. And all of these constants, so the only thing that we need to make sure is that the constants are smaller than 1. Okay, so, no, this was the wrong trick. Sorry, this was the wrong trick. I get a better one. Let's ignore that for the moment. Okay. I thought about the wrong proof and this is not in the book. Let's ignore the idea. Let's take the real one. Okay, so we ignore the idea. Okay, so, this is the last hurdle that we had to get through, right? We need for applying the lemma, we need this is true for every n greater or equal to 1. But we don't know that it's true for every n greater or equal to 1, right? So, what we have as a problem is that this says something about exponential growth. And this tells us that in the first few layers, in the first finitely many layers, the function can grow really fast, right? Because we don't know that it is bounded by constant times something. So, we need to get rid of that problem. Okay, so, what does our lemma say? The lemma 4.3, this is still somewhere or did I know I found, I think I just cleaned it. The lemma 4.3 says that if f of n is between 0, f of n. If f of n is big omega of n to log b a plus epsilon and 0 is smaller than a times f of n divided by b is smaller than c times f of n for all n greater or equal to 1. Then, the sum j equals 0 to round it down log b of n of a to the j times f of n divided by b to the j is theta of f of n. This is what it says. Now, what we have is that this sum falls into two parts. The first part is the part that sums up everything where this function, where this n is larger, so the sum, j equals 0 to log b of n of a to the j times f of n divided by b to the j falls into two parts. The first part is the first part. The first part is that j equals 0 to this number here to n divided by n 0 rounded down. The first part is that we have to write about n of a to the j times f of n divided by b to the j. to the j plus the rest of the sum. The rest of the sum is j equals n divided by n0 plus 1 to log b n of a to the j f n divided by b to the j. So this is what it looks like. We want to go to infinity so we have n very large. So this is the second part of the sum. So the sum splits in two parts. But what is important to see is that this is a constant because the capital N is a constant, the small n0 is a constant, the a is a constant and the b is a constant. So all of these things is a constant. So this is a constant. Because it doesn't depend on n. Oh, it does depend on n. It's a constant times f of n. That's what I wanted to say. Right? So it's a constant times f of n. Because only f of n. f tilde of n. Because only f tilde of n features. They forgot they got another tilde here. Okay. So, this here basically satisfies this condition. Because all the other terms are zero. So for them we can add any small terms that we want. This only makes these things bigger. So from the lemma this is theta of f of n. So this is a constant times f tilde of n. This is theta times f tilde of n. So altogether this is theta of f tilde of n. And so finally what we get, now we have to put these things together again. So let's put these things together and now what do we get? We get that means that t of n is theta of n to the log b a plus theta t tilde of n. But we know that f tilde of n is big omega of n to the log b a plus epsilon. Which means that f tilde of t tilde of t tilde of n is big omega of t tilde of n. And the second thing says that t tilde of n is big o of n to the log b a plus big o of t tilde of n. The second thing says that T tilde of n is O to the log bA plus O of F tilde of n. And F tilde of n, as we know, is the other way around. And so this we know that F tilde of n is big omega of n to the log bA plus epsilon. But n to the log bA plus epsilon increases stronger than n to the log bA. So this all together is omega to F tilde of n because it is at least n to the log bA plus epsilon because F tilde is only that. So those two things together tell us that T tilde of n is theta of F tilde of n. Okay, now we have to get this back together. So that means, well, by a very similar trick of before and again using this inequality, that tells us that T of n is T tilde of n divided by n0, which says this is theta of F tilde of n divided by n0. But this is a limit for n going to infinity. So the n divided by n0 doesn't count because n divided by n0 also goes to infinity if n goes to infinity. So this is the same as theta of F tilde going to infinity. And this proves case three. And so this proves the whole master theorem. Okay, now. This proof is a bit annoying, but it is important because it allows us to analyze recursions. Recursions that are usually produced by divide and conquer algorithms. However, we've seen an example where when we analyzed the recursion trees where the divide and conquer algorithm is unbalanced. So we split the problem in a problem of size one third and a problem of size two thirds. So there are a few famous optimization algorithms that do splits that are not the same sizes. So they split into different sized chunks. And so we need to be able to analyze these problems as well. And so the question is, how do we do that? And this leads us immediately to the section on Akra-Patsi recurrences. Akra-Patsi recurrences are a generalization of these master recurrences. They really account for splitting the tree into different sized parts. They have the same idea of a driving function. So again, we have our f of n. But we don't have a single a times t divided by b. But we have a sum of those. So we have the sum plus the sum. Yeah, k or i equals one to k of ai times t of n divided by b. And all of these ai and b are constants. And this is again true for n greater or equal to n zero. And it's theta of one as before for n bigger than n zero for n smaller equal to n zero. So this is the idea of an Akra-Patsi recurrence. It's just a generalization of the master recurrences. So we also would like to have a similar formula as for the master theorem, right? We would like to have something like the watershed function and things like that. And as you remember, I just casually brushed over it when I presented the master theorem. So actually the formulation of the master theorem, which we did not prove in the lecture course, involved a floor operation and a seal operation, right? Because we wanted to split the natural number into two parts. And if it cannot be split properly, then we have to round up and round down and get a slightly imbalanced tree. So in the Akra-Patsi recurrence, we always have an imbalanced tree by construction. And so the Akra-Patsi recurrences also account for rounding downs and rounding ups. So in real, in reality, what we have is, well, before I continue, I should probably clean one of the blackboards. So I'll move the other ones down. Oops. Okay. Okay. Yeah, let's start with that one. at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the Yeah, so since we're in algorithms, we usually only consent with integer-sized problems, our recurrences, of course, have to go back to integer-sized recurrences. So what actually an Akrapatsi recurrence looks like is we have, so actually, we have the t of n is f of n plus the sum of i equals 1 to k of ai times t of b, n divided by bi, rounded down plus the sum of i equals k plus 1 to l of ai times t of n divided by bi, rounded up. So this is what an Akrapatsi recurrence really looks like. So we have these two operations, this ceiling operation, rounding up operation, and the floor operation, the rounding down operation. And the point is that the master theorem proof is that the proof of the general master theorem is very involved. You have to do a lot of things to prove that the ceiling and floor operations don't matter. And that's why we've omitted that. So that's good for a real math course, but it's not good for a general algorithm data structure course, even if it's for math in data science. For Akrapatsi recurrences, you have to be very careful because things start to go wrong here if you really ignore the floor and seal operations unless you assume something about the function fn. And what you need to assume about the function fn is the so-called polynomial growth condition. So in order to get rid of the floor and ceiling operations, we require f of n to satisfy the so-called polynomial growth condition. And the polynomial growth condition looks a bit awkward on first glance. So the point is, it says the following. There exists a constant n in the natural numbers such that for every phi that is greater or equal to 1, there exists a d that is bigger than 1 such that we can enclose our f of some psi times n between f of n divided by d and f of them times d. So here we have f of n divided by d. Here we have f of n times d. f of n times d. So this has to be true for all n greater or equal to n and for all psi that are between 1 and phi. So here we have f of n times d. So here we have f of n times d. So here we have f of n times d. f of n times d. Okay, so in first glance, it's completely unclear why this is called a polynomial growth condition, what this has to do with polynomials or why I don't write F of n should be capital O of n to the power of k or something. The point is that this does two things. First, it makes sure that the function doesn't grow exponentially fast. So it should grow at least as much as a polynomial. But the second thing is, those are asymptotic things to say. What is also make sure is that the function doesn't make bigger and bigger spikes and only by that grows. So the function should grow somewhat polynomially, somewhat regularly. Okay? So for us, it is good that we learn for the exam what the polynomial growth condition is. But it is important to understand that it can be proved that if F of n is theta of n to the alpha times lg to the beta n times lg to the gamma of n, then F satisfies the polynomial growth condition. And in the lecture course, we will not have any other function classes. So there are others that satisfy that. And there are some functions that have polynomial growth but don't satisfy the polynomial growth condition. So they're a bigger or of a polynomial but don't satisfy the polynomial growth condition. But we won't meet them in the lecture course. So it's important to understand that basically if your driving function is of this form for some alpha, beta and gamma that are constant. So alpha, beta and gamma constant. Then F satisfies the polynomial growth condition. And what is important is that exponential functions don't. So if F of n is 2 to the power of n, it does not satisfy the polynomial growth condition. So exponential functions and superexponentials, exponentials, like the factorial operation don't satisfy the polynomial growth condition. So exponential functions don't satisfy the polynomial growth condition. Okay, now, what does the Akrapazi-Recurrence relation say? Well, there are actually two theorems. The first theorem, which is four or five, I guess, Because we had 4 just before. If T satisfies the recurrence, let's write it down like this. T is F plus the sum I equals 1 to K of A times T divided by B I, round it down, plus the sum of I equals K plus 1 to L of A I, T of N divided by B I, rounded up, and is equal to theta 1. This is for N smaller, sorry, for N bigger than N0. This is for N smaller equal to N0. And T tilde of N satisfies the recurrence that T tilde of N is equal to F of N plus the sum I equals 1 to L of A I times T of N divided by B I, without any rounding operations for N bigger than N0. And theta of 1 for N being smaller equal to N0. And F of N satisfies the polynomial growth condition. Then T of N is theta of T tilde of N. Which basically tells us that if the polynomial growth condition is satisfied, you can ignore all the rounding downs and rounding ups when you calculate your recursion. So, once you've figured out that your F and your driving function is a function of that form, then you can safely ignore the rounding ups and rounding downs and just do so as if we never would round, if we just would divide, right? So, this is the first thing. So, if you want to make sure that solving these recurrences works properly, you have first to check that your F of N satisfies the polynomial growth condition or is of that structure. If F of N is of that structure, you can ignore the floor and ceiling operations and just put everything together in one large sum. Okay? Is this clear? Okay, great. So, this is the first thing. The second thing is then the formula for the Akrabatzi method. So, the formula for the Akrabatzi method says that this is basically the next theorem, which is 4.6. 4.6. We don't prove this one. This is just too much. So, if there exist constants, AI bigger than 0 and BI bigger than 1 for I equals 1 to L. F of N satisfies the polynomial growth condition. And T of N is equal to F of N plus the sum I equals 1 to K. And of course, AI times T of N divided by BI plus the sum I equals K plus 1 to L of AI of T of N divided by BI rounded up. And T equals to theta of 1. This is for N bigger than N0 and this is for N smaller equal to N0. So, as before, we have this recursion. Then there exists a unique P bigger than 0. So, P in R such that the sum I equals 1 to L. A I times 1 over BI to the power of P is equal to 1. So, P is equal to T of N. P is equal to Zeta of N to the power of P times 1 plus the integral of 1 to N of F of X divided by X to the P plus 1. Dx. So, this is the solution for the general equation. So, the general equation tells us that there always is such a P. So, why is this true? Well, it's quite simple because if P goes to infinity, right? So, if in this formula P goes to infinity, this term here because P is greater than 1, this term goes to 0. So, all of these terms go to 0. So, if P goes to infinity, this goes to 0. If P goes to minus infinity, this one will go to infinity. So, if P goes to minus infinity, this goes to infinity. This is a continuous function. So, by the intermediate value theorem, it has to be 1 once. And it has to be 1 only once because the decrease and increase is monotonic. So, this is a monotonic function that goes from infinity to 0. So, it has to hit 1 exactly once. So, this P always exists. And then you have to calculate that integral, right? So, if you calculate that integral, this tells you how it works. Now, let's see an application to that, right? Because without an application, things look a bit messy. So, let's look at how we can calculate this. This is just enough time to do that. So, let's clean the blackboard first. And there are cases where you have to calculate that P. And there are cases where you don't have to calculate that P. So, what you do is you always start without calculating the P. Okay? So, how do we do that? Because in many cases, the P cancels out at the end and you don't have to bother calculating it. Sometimes it does not cancel out and then you have to calculate it. Unfortunately, this sum here usually cannot be calculated directly. So, you need to do a numerical method to get the value, right? But most of the time or many times, it really cancels out. So, let's see. In our example, it does. So, that I don't have to involve some numerics to do so. But this is a one-dimensional function. So, it's quite easy to do Newton's method or seconds method or something like that to do so. Okay, now. Jock here. Okay. So, let's look at the simple recurrence. And the simple recurrence is T of n is T of n over 5. This is a 5. plus T of n over 10. No. Not 7 over 10. Yeah. 7n over 10. 7n over 10. Okay. So, let's look at what happens if we take this formula. So, what do we need to do? The a i is one, both. And the bi is either 1 over 5. It's either 5 or it's 10. So, let's look at the formula. The formula says that we need to find the unique p that satisfies that 1 over 5 to the power of p plus 7 over 10 to the power of p is equal to 1. Okay. So, it is not obvious what the number is. What you can always do is. What you can always do is you can try to do the so-called second method. The second method works like this. The second method works like this. You start with any. So, this is a function. Let's call this function g of p. So, you start with any two numbers. Like p0 is equal to 1 and p1 is equal to 0. Something like that. Right? 1 plus 1 is 2. Then what you do is you produce the next element. The next element is p k plus 1 is always g of p k minus p k plus 1. Sorry. Sorry. p k minus. p k minus. g of p k divided by times x. k minus x. k minus 1 divided by g of p k minus g of p k minus 1. Right? Then you iterate until it doesn't change anymore. And then what you get is that p is equal to 0.83978. 0.83978. And so on. Okay. But we don't care about this. We only know that there is a p. p. And so what we need to do is we need to calculate that theta. So let's calculate what is n to the p times. And then we have this integral. So there is 1 plus the integral from 1 to n. I forgot the plus n here. Sorry. I forgot the plus n here. Sorry. I forgot the plus n for the recursion. Okay. So then what we have is f of n. f of n is n. So f of x is x divided by. And then we have x to the p plus 1 dx. Well, this is n to the p times 1 plus the integral from 1 to n. So now we have x divided by x to the p plus 1, which is 1 over x to the p, right? dx. So the only thing that we need to figure out is whether p is equal to 1. Because if p is equal to 1, the integral is different from when p is not equal to 1. Because if p is equal to 1, it's a logarithm. So we check whether 1 is true. But 1 over 5 plus 7 over 10 is not 1. So p is not equal to 1, which is good. Actually, we know that it's 0.83. So what is this integral? Well, this integral is increase the power of x by 1 and then divide to what you got. So this is equal to n to the power of p as 1 plus. Now we have 1 over xp, x to the power of p is 1 over x to the power of p minus 1. And we have to divide by the constant, which is times 1 divided by p plus 1, right? So this is equal to n. And we have to evaluate this between 1 and n. So this is equal to n to the power of p times 1 plus some constant. 1 divided by 1 minus p times n to the p minus 1. And then we have a constant, a minus some constant, which is this. So this is equal to n to the power of p plus 1 over n to the power of p minus 1 is n. So this is equal to n to the power of p plus some constant times n to the power of p plus n. Okay. So we already know that 1 over 5 plus 7 over 10, this is 8 over 10, which is smaller than 1. Being smaller than 1 means that p is smaller than 1. So p is smaller than 1, meaning that n to the p grows slower than n. Therefore, t of n is theta of n to the p plus n, which is theta to the n, theta of n since p is smaller than 1. Right? So this is what you need to do. So this is what you need to do. You have the constants here. The constants don't care because of the thetas. And therefore, we have the power of p, which is coming from here and then n. So why is p then smaller than 1? So p is smaller than 1 since 1 over 5 plus 7 over 10 is smaller than 1. Right? And the function goes from infinity to 0. So it has to hit 1 at point point. It goes to 0. It comes from infinity. And so if here in 1 it is smaller than 1, it has to hit 1 before it reaches 1. Right? So therefore, p is smaller than 1. Right? And we have 0 here somewhere. And for 0 the value is 2. And since the value is 2 for 0, p has to be between 0 and 1. And this is the only information that we really need. Yeah? So we don't need to calculate p in many cases. In many cases, we only have to know where the p is because then it will cancel out anyway somewhere. Yeah? Sometimes it doesn't cancel out. And so we have to calculate it. So for example, if we know that p is greater than 1 in this case, then we need to calculate it using, for example, second method. Yeah? But this is basically the idea. And so I'm sorry that it took 4 minutes too many from you, but we started early. Next, so this will stop the analysis of recursions. The next chapter will include a bit about randomized search. But you haven't done a probability course by now. So we will do only very basic probability that you likely learned at school. And then we will start developing algorithms for sorting and things like that. So most of the theory is done by now. So wish you a nice. at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the
