We are currently discussing bee trees. So yesterday we started to discuss bee trees, which are probably the most used trees in data science. And yesterday we have discussed the structure of bee trees. So, and the definition of what they look like, just to remind you, basically what we have is we have a parameter t. And the parameter t tells us something about our interior nodes of the tree, in that the number of keys in these interior nodes is between t-1 and 2t-1. Always. And all the leaves have the same height in the tree. And the two most important characteristics of bee trees. Then in addition, every node carries a number of keys. And these keys split the children of the bee tree and their keys into disjoint subsets that are actually, like in a binary tree, that are actually separated by the keys. And if you really think about that, there has to be an exception to the rule that every node has between t-1 and 2t-1 keys. And that's why I always said all the interior nodes of the tree have this property. Because if you have less than t-1 keys in the tree altogether, this property is not satisfiable for all the nodes. So there is an exception, of course, to that rule. And this exception is not an interior node, but the root node. So the root node is one node in the tree that can actually carry less than t-1 elements. But that's the only one. So the root node is the only one. And so in contrast to all the other possibilities of, well, in contrast to binary trees, if you think about binary trees and inserting a node in a binary tree, or deleting a node from a binary tree, binary trees grow from the bottom, from the leaves. So leaves are one by one converted to interior nodes in a binary tree and new nodes are just added at the bottom. And this is very much different with B trees. So B trees grow at the root. So the root gets higher and higher. And so we have to distinguish basically two cases. With the case where the root node becomes overfull, so carries more than 2t-1 keys. Or when another node, an interior node, carries more than 2t-1 keys. And so how can we actually solve that problem? Let's make a small sketch. So what we have... Okay, whatever that means. So when we have a B tree and we have... So that's... Let's do white nodes. And then we have more white nodes down there. Maybe we have only one here or so and we have two here. So let's assume that we want to enter a new element into that tree. And we want to enter that new element down there. Right? And so first we fill the keys, but maybe the keys are full as well. Right? And t is equal to 2. So 2t-1. Well, no, actually that's bad. I should have drawn another one, which is a fourth one. And here we have three keys. Yeah, something like that. And so... So that node is full, right? Those nodes are full as well. So what we need to do is we want to keep the same height for all of the leaves. So if we want to insert something, let's say here, so the new key would go in there. And we have to do something about it. We just can't put the key in there because the node is already full. And what we also can't do is we can't put a new leaf to the bottom because otherwise not all the leaves would have the same height. Right? So the only chance that we have is we can split this leaf into two new ones. Right? So we can rip this leaf apart, making two new ones and adding the new key in there. So let's do the new key red. But now all the colored... Oh, well, there is one. It's probably broken, but never mind. So we put the new key there at its place. Okay? But then what we get is we get new, two new children of that node. Right? So we would add this new child, which is completely new. We would add that to the tree. Okay? But then this key here that is in the middle would have to go there to split these two children. Right? So this is the idea. So we take the median key and the median key has to go up there because that splits these two children. So we have to insert the median key somewhere, maybe there. Maybe there. Because we have one child more. If we have one child more, we need one more key to separate them. But this node was full already. So we have the same, we face the same problem again. Right? We cannot fit the new key in there. Which would mean that we also have to rip apart this node into two. Right? And keep those two children there and those three children there, for example. And take the key that separates the two up to the next level. And so here we have only two keys currently because we have only three children. So we can add a new child here. The new child is up there and we can add the new key there. And then the tree has the root node has four children. And this node has two children. This node has three children and so on. Right? It's still the same height. Okay. If we did it like that, what we had to do is we had to traverse down to insert the key there. And then figuring out which of the nodes actually overflowed. Right? Okay. This is somewhat suboptimal because it has the problem that we have to go traverse the tree down and traverse the tree up again. Which is two traverses of the tree going back down and going back up. And so what B-trees are actually doing is while they are going down, they are checking whether a node is already full. Because if a node is already full, it's very likely that it will have to be split very soon. Right? It's not necessarily now because the down there could be not so full. But in principle. And so what the insert operation is doing, it is going downwards and it's splitting all the nodes that are already full. Right when going down. And since we are doing that while we are going down, we can be sure that whenever we try to split the node, its parents will not be full. Why? Because if the parent had been full, we would have already passed it. And since it was full there, we would have already split it. So therefore the parents of nodes that we want to split are never full. Right? So this can be done by going down in the tree and we don't have to go back up. So we don't have to access the same node twice. If you remember yesterday, we have to load these nodes into memory from disk. And what we want to avoid is we want to avoid that we have to access a node twice in the same operation. So therefore we make sure that we use every node only once. And so we split the node preemptively. So before we even know whether we have to split it, once it's full, we split it because then we can ensure that we don't have to go back up again. It might be not perfectly optimal, the number of nodes that we have in the tree, not yet, but it's perfectly optimal with respect to that we have to access every node only once. Okay? So this is the idea when we are traversing a B tree. Right? So whenever we hit, whenever we know where to insert something, so it's obvious where we have to insert it. Right? Because we know in what range of keys our new key falls. So we know where we have to go into which child we have to go. And then whenever we hit the node that is full, we write when we are there, we split it right away into two sub nodes. And since the node has two T minus one keys, right? We have to transfer the median key up because that's the split between the two nodes. And then two times two minus one, two times T minus one keys remain. So that's the reason why B tree has keys between two T minus one and T minus one many. Because if you split at two T minus one node, you get two T minus one nodes and an additional key, which is one level up. So this is the reason why we have to double amount and why everything is odd. Because the nice thing about odd and odd number of keys is that there is a well-defined median key that is actually separating the two. Right? So this is basically the idea. And once the root node is full, we have to split the root node, which is the same operation. Right? So once the root node is full, we split the root node in two, but then we don't have a tree anymore because we have two roots, which means that we have to insert the new root on top. But the new root on top has only one key always because we just split two elements and have a new root node. And so the only node in the whole tree that violates the number of keys is between T minus one and two T minus one property is the root node. The root node can have as little as only well, if the tree is empty, it doesn't have any key. But if the tree is not empty, the root node can have as little as one key. So the root node is the only node that doesn't satisfy the property that between T minus one and two T minus one keys are in the node. All the others make sure that this happens because we only add a new layer down there if the root node is already full. And if the root node is already full, both of its children will automatically have T minus one keys. And so since we are growing from the root, we make sure that first all the leaves have the same height because new height can only come into place if we add a new root node. But this just adds one to the height of all the leaves that are already there. And so all the leaves stay at the same height, right? And a split doesn't change the height of the leaves. Because it just adds one more key. Only a split of the root node adds a height of one, but to all of the leaves. And that's why using that principle, the property of the tree that all of the leaves have the same height always stays correct. And the other way around, if we're going the other way around, if we're deleting a node from the tree, we have to be more careful. Because if we delete something, one of the children might end up with less than T minus one keys, right? Which means that we have to merge the nodes again. Because then this is less than T minus one keys. The next one has more than T minus one keys. And so less than two T minus one keys. So we have to think about how to merge the keys when we're going back up. So the delete operation is quite non-trivial and we will discuss it soon. But we start with setting up the tree in the first place. So let's start with no, it was already there. Let's start with the projection. Okay, so let's start with the most important operation in B-trees, searching stuff. This is very similar to searching stuff in a binary tree. So we search for a key K starting from node X. And so what do we have to do? Well, we have to check whether, well, first we have to look for the keys. So where the new key sits. Here in the operation B-trees search in lines two and three, it uses just a linear search. So it goes from left to right through all the keys that are in there and just take a linear search operation and just identify the place where the new key should go. Right. Or where the new key can be found. This is not necessarily the best operation. You can use any search operation of sorted elements in order to find the correct position. You can also use binary search, like start in the middle and go left and go right. So what binary search is usually doing, you can do whatever you like. It has to be fast and it has to be in memory. So one possibility is to use linear search because it's simple to implement and you don't have to worry about anything because this is anyway much faster than the discrete that you need further down. But of course, you could optimize also that search operation. So therefore, what is done in the lines two and three is the index of the key between which two keys actually the element stands. So this is this is the while loop doing so it's it's stopping after key I and then it's checking whether we are actually at the same key. So if we if we hit the key, then we return it and we finished. Otherwise, if we are a leaf node, then the key is not in there because it cannot descend further down. And if it is not a leaf node, then we have a child and we know that the key is somewhere in the subtree rooted by the child. And so we just go down to the child and going down to the child means two operations. First, reading the child from disk and then recursively calling our B-tree search again on the subtree that is rooted at the child I. Right. So if we have the keys that are sorted, so we have key one, key two and so on. Key n. What the linear search is doing, it's iterating until the key is. Key n. What the key is greater or equal K-I and smaller than K-I plus one. Right. So this is it hits the first the first I. So this that this equality happens. It doesn't matter if you have several keys, if the keys that this is only true if all the keys are different. If you have several keys that can be equal, you can do it the same way. But then you cannot just return X and I. But you have to look through all the keys that have the same thing and check whether that's the that's the element you do want to have. Right. So but this is in principle the idea. So you get back the key because the first the lines two and three actually search the I that satisfies this chain of inequalities. And this of course says that K is either equal to K-I or that K is in the subtree is in the subtree. Rooted at the child C-I. And then you traverse down by reading the child node from disk, which is the whole node. Right. So large block. And then you traverse and then you continue from there. And once you've arrived at the leaf, then you know that you're not in there. Otherwise you will find it at some place. So this is the search operation. As you can see, the search operation uses as many disk grids as the tree has height at most. Right. Since all the leaves have the same height, the height is well defined. And the last thing that you would do is you would read the leaf node and then you can decide whether the key is not in the tree already. OK. Is this clear? No. Yes. So in every node, you check into which child you have to traverse. This is what the while loop is doing. And then you just only do the same look up in this node. Then you do the same look up in this node. And once you're there, once you're at the leaf, you stop. Right. So you have to read the root disk block, which is usually always in memory. Then you have to read this disk block and I have to read this disk block. So the number of reads that you have is worst case order of the height of the tree. The height of the tree is everywhere the same. So every leaf the same. OK, great. So now, so this tells you how to find keys. Now the next question is how to actually insert a new element into that tree. And in order to insert something, you have to create the tree first. So we have to think what do we have to do to actually create such a big tree, a B tree. What are the information that we have that we actually have? Well, the first thing is we have to get a new node for the root. Right. Allocate node just says, give me a chunk of memory that can hold a whole node. So it produces a new chunk of memory. And this is called X. And then in X, it says that it's a leaf because if the root node is the only node, it's also a leaf. Then the number of keys that are in there is zero. As we said, the only node that can have less than T minus one keys is the root node. So it can have zero elements. And then we write the node to the disk so that the disk remembers whenever we turn it off, whenever we would have to reload the database. For example, we make sure that the information is on disk already. And then we memorize that the root node is actually the node that we've just created. And this creates an empty tree. So the empty tree is just there. It is a leaf, doesn't have doesn't contain any keys. And the root points there. So T dot root points there. And this is this. This is the beginning. And now we need to insert nodes into the tree. And we will follow that procedure here. Right. So what are the procedures that we actually need to understand? What we need to understand is we need to understand how to split a node in two. Right. So this is an important operation. And what do we know? That's what we discussed before. We do already know that when we're going down and when we're splitting a node in two, then we know that the parent has enough space to insert more keys. So the parent is never full. Right. So the parent of that node will never be full because if it were full, we would have split it already before. So the parent of a new node is never full. And so that what we can do, we can have two invariants. Hence the first invariant is the parent is not full and the node is full. And now we have to think about how to split the node in two. This is one operation that we have to do. And the other operation is in a non-full node, we have to insert the key somewhere. The new key. Right. OK. So let's look at the possibilities. And the first possibility is the split child. Right. This is the important one because that's the first one we hit when we're going downwards. We need to split the child. So what do we know? Let's look at the picture. So if our child is full, then what do we have to do? We have to determine the key that is the median that is basically in the middle of that node, because we want to split along that key. So let's draw it again. So let's draw it in a node that has five keys. This is full and its parent isn't. So let's say the parent has only three keys in there currently. Now, this is a full node, so we have to split it. So this key is actually the key where what satisfies that every child that is down there. So we have six children, right? Up to we have six children of that node. If it's an intermediate node. If it's a leaf, then it's anyway trivial. So but let's look at children. So this is child one. This is a note. This is child zero. Child one. Child two. Child three. Child four. Child five. Okay. Okay. So this is key one. Key two. This is key three. This is key four. And this is key five. Right? So this that's what a node looks like. So we know that we, that all the children information, all the keys in children C0, C1 and C2 are smaller equal to key three. And all the children information, all the keys in children C3, C4 and C5 are greater equal to K3. It's something we know already because it's a B3. And so the idea is, well, what we want to do, let's call this K hat one. This K hat two. And this K hat three. And this is maybe this child, which sits. So there's another child there. There's another child there and another child there. But this is the, this is where it sits. So since it sits there, we know that the key K3 is between K1 hat and K2 hat. Right? So this is something we know by the property of the B3. So what we need to do is we need to make this node into two. So we want to split that node into this part and into this part. And we want to insert both these nodes over there. Right? What we know is that all the keys here are bigger than K1 hat. And all the keys here are also bigger than K1 hat. And all of them are also smaller than K2 hat. That means that both children have to go in between these two. Right? And this key three has, is exactly the one that splits them. So therefore the K3 is going up there and is becoming K2 double hat. K1 is K1 double hat. K2 hat will be K3 double hat. And K3 hat will be K4 double hat. Right? Because this is now the new key and the double hats are the one that are the new ones. K3 double hat. And so we will afterwards have four keys up there. They will have five children. All the children to the left stay as they are. All the children to the right stay as they are. But this child will be split in two. And after the split, this will have two and this will have two entries. Right? Which is exactly T minus one. Because if 2T minus one is five, then T is three. Yeah? And so, three minus one is two. So this will be the smallest possible note. So we make one largest possible note into two smallest possible notes. By splitting them. And this is what the algorithm here is doing. So let's look at whether this is true. So, what do we know? We just remember first the note that we need to split. Which is the Ith note. So the B3 split child gets two things as an information. The note, this is X. So X is that. And we get the index of the child. So here, the index is two. No, it's one. So here the index is one. So that's zero. That's the one. The first child, the child to child one, is the one that we have to split. Okay. So that's the one we remember. So we take a Y is equal to CI. And then we produce a new note. Because we need a new note down there. Right? We don't want to keep the one that we already had. But we need a new one. Which we call Z. And now we have to distribute the information into these two notes. Okay? So how do we do that? Well, of course the point is, if this was a leaf, this will also be a leaf. That's why we transfer the Z leaf is equal to Y leaf. So both of them are either leafs or not leafs because we split them at the same level. And then what we do know is that the number of notes in the new note will be T minus one. That's something we've just calculated. Right? And then what we need to do is we need to copy the stuff over. And it's cleverer to take this note as the Z and this note as the Y. Because then we only have to copy the last keys and the last children to Z. Right? Because the first ones do not renumber because they still stay C0, C1 and C2. And K1 and K2, the indices as well. But here we have to renumber. Because in the new note, this then will be the new K1 key. And this will be the new K2 key. And this will be the new C0. This will be the new C1. And this will be the new C2 of that note. Right? So we have to renumber, at least for the second part, we have to renumber the indices. This is done in the loop on line 5 to 6 for the keys. And in the loop 8 to 9 for the children, unless the note is a leaf. Because then it doesn't have children. We don't have to rename. Right? So these are the two renaming loops. And then what we actually do is, yeah, what we actually do then is we have to insert the, so in the loop between 11 and 12, what we have to do is we have to rename these keys and these children. Right? We have to move them to the right by one index. You see, on the left, all of them keep their numbers. But on the right, the number increases by one because we insert something there, which is the loop in lines 11 and 12. And then what we have to do is we have to remember that the new child of X is Z. Yeah? The I plus first child of Z is X because the Ith child still stays Y. We don't have to do anything in Y because we just reduce the number of elements in Y. We just don't care about the pointers that are pointing to nowhere. We just remember that we only have T minus one elements there. And for the Z node, we have to fill them with the information of the children and of the new keys. And here we have to, so this one is still the K1, the child one, but the child two will be the Z node, which is the one in line 13. So line 13 remembers that we have this new child here, the child Z. And then what we have to do is we have to shift the keys in X as well, which is the next array, the next loop from 14 to 15. They just renumber the keys up there. And then we store the new key, which is 16, which is the median key that we store in X, which is this one. And then we finally finished because we have to increase the number of elements in N by one. But we finally inserted everything. And so we made the node X bigger by one. And that's it. And then we remember everything. We remember the new X node because this is what we changed. We remember the new Y node because we've changed that one. And we remember the new node, the Z node, because that's also something we've allocated anew. We write all of them to disk. And that's it. Is this somewhat understandable? The algorithm compared, combined with the drawing? Or not? Because let's let well, let's do it again. OK, let's go through it again. So what do we have to do? We have to take this node here and we know we have to split this one, which is the Ith child in our. So this is the Ith child. They probably should have drawn this white and this red. So the drawing was not very good. So let's see. This is the Ith child. So we know that we have if we want to split that. We have to insert the key that is down there between these two keys, because the child lives between these two keys. OK. Currently, there is only one child. But when we split the child between these two keys, afterwards we will have two children. Making sure that first, all the numbering that is left to the child does not change. Because we don't move anything there. We start numbering from the left. But all the numbers that are right from this child, they change by one. Because we have, we will insert a new key and a new child. So when we are numbering from the left, all then to the right, we will have an index that is one higher. Right. So the keys have an index that is one higher and the children as well. So this is child zero. Here we have child I. Here afterwards, we here currently, we have child I plus one, I plus two, child N. Right. So this is how it is before the split. After the split, the children from C zero to C I stay as they are. But the new child will be child I plus one. Making the child I plus one to child I plus two, this one to child I plus three and so on. And this to child N plus one. Right. So this is how the numbering changes. Great. Splitting that node is the first thing we do. We split it by getting a completely new node, which is this one. So we get the completely new node and keep the old one. Why do we keep the left side? Because in the left side, the numbering doesn't change. Meaning the only thing we have to do on the left is we have to remember that we don't have two T minus one elements, but only T minus one elements. So this is the only operation we do at Y, which is the only thing that is changed in Y, which is in line 10. Line 10 just says that the new number of elements in Y is T minus one. And that's just forgetting that all the rest is in there. Okay. And then what we have to do is we have to fill the node Z. So what do we fill it with? Well, we fill it with everything that is after the split key. The split key itself does not end up in the new node because the split key itself is used in the parent to split the two nodes now. So therefore the median key wanders up into the parent node. All the keys that are to the left stay in Y and all the keys that are to the right stay in Z, come to go to Z, but they have to be renumbered in Z because they are not starting at T, but they are starting at zero or at one again. So therefore we have to copy them to different places. This is the loop that copies the key in J plus T to the key in J because all the keys here move by T. T is three in this example. So four becomes one, five becomes two. So all of them move by T. This is the first loop in five to six. And the same is true for the children. All the children numbers also move by T. But only if there are children there, which is only the case if the root is not a leaf. If it's a leaf, then there are no children and so we don't have to renumber children. But if there is no leaf, then we renumber the children as well with the same idea. So this is the loop in eight and nine. So all of them are also that the J plus T child will be the Jth child of Z afterwards. So therefore they are renumbered. Okay, and then we are finished with splitting. So then Y is as it should be. Z is as it should be. But what we have to do is we have to insert the new key and the new child into the X node, which is the rest. Right? So what do we know? We know that everything left to the ith index stays as it was. So we don't have to care about anything there. Everything here right to the ith index has to move by one up because we are inserting something there. So the numbering moves by one, which is the next loop. Right? So we shift all the children of X1 to the right starting at the ith child. And why do we do it from the top? So why is the loop from the top? Because if we would move it like this, we would override it. So therefore, we going from the back and first copy them to the right, then to the right, then to the right, so that we don't override what we're already doing. So that's why the loop is going the wrong way, so to speak. Right? So it's going from the n plus first entry to the i plus first entry and it's copying in that direction. Okay? And then the i plus first entry is free because we copied the i plus first entry to i plus two. And so the new child, which is set, goes to the i plus first entry, which is in 13. And then we do the same for the keys. Right? So we move the keys as well. So again, going from top to bottom. So we copy the same thing again, which is the same trick. And then we insert, then the ith place is free. And we insert the key there. And then we're finished. Then we only have to remember that we have n plus one elements now in the node x. And then we write everything to disk that we've changed. Okay? Is it clear now? Okay. Great. So this splits a node. Now, it splits a child node. There is one more thing that we have to do is we have to split the root node. The root node. So we have to think about what happens if we have to split the root node. So when do we have to split the root node? Well, this is much simpler because what we're first doing, the root node is full. So this is when do we have to split the root node when it is full. So what we do know is that when we split the root node, we have to get a new height in the tree. So we have to get a new root node. This is the first thing that is done. So we allocate the new root, which is the new root node. Then we say it's not a leaf. Then the number of elements in there is zero. So we have to do zero. And because we don't have a key yet, it has one child. Because if we have no keys, we have one child, which is the old root, right? So let's draw this. So if you have the root node, and the root node is full. Okay. So we have all of these children, which are six. And so what do we do when we split the root node? So here is root. The idea is we just add a new node. Okay. Which is the new root, which doesn't have any keys. And the only thing what it does, it has a child, this node now. This is no longer root. So we have this situation. We have a full child and the parent that is empty. And then we're doing the same as before. We're just splitting the child. And splitting the child means transferring the median key to the root node. And getting two children that are basically smallest possible. And then the root node has one key afterwards. And this one key distinguishes between the left side. So let's add this in red again. So the root node afterwards has one key. And two children, the first child being this part. And the second child being this part. And so the root has only one key. And so the root can grow and grow and grow until it's full again. And when it's full, we add a new root node that is empty and then call the same procedure as before. So this is basically what splitting the root node looks like. And this is how the tree grows. It grows by splitting the root node. And then we are thinking about how to insert a new element into the tree. So we have a new key and we want to insert the new key into the tree. So we start at the root node, right? We start here and we are searching downwards where to insert it. And as we said before, whenever we hit something, we have to split the node first. So the first node that we hit is actually the root node. So we check whether the root node is full. Okay? If the root node is full, then we split it and we start by inserting again with the new root node. And if the root node is not full, then we insert where we are at the root node. So we call the B3 insert non-full routine from there. And this is a recursive routine and this is what it does. Okay, so how do we go ahead? What we need to do is we need to do exactly what I said before. So now we know that the root node is not full because we would have split it before. So now we know the root node is not full. So every parent node that we are calling this one is not full. So we always call the insert operation on a node that is not full. Right? Because we start at the root node. If the root node is full, we split it before to make sure that it is not full. And so we are sure that when we enter that routine, the node that we enter it with is not the full node. Okay, now what are we doing? We first check whether we are at a leaf. Okay, when we are at a leaf, we know that the leaf is not full because it doesn't have any children. And we know that we have a non-full node. So we can insert the key at the right position. Meaning that we first look for where the key has to go, which is the while loop in 3 to 5. It's the same while loop as before. So we are looking to where is the key going, the new one. Where is the new key going? And we are basically inserting it in there. And since we know that we have to insert the key, right? It's not in there. We know that we have to insert the key. We know where to insert the key. And so we search for the key in the same time while we are copying the keys to the right. So that's why we search from the back. So whenever we have not yet found the key to the right. Because we have to get the hole where we insert the new key. And we know that we have to insert it so it will grow in any case. So we are moving, we are searching from the back and moving everything that we pass one to the right. Right? This is the first while loop. It's moving one to the right. And once we are there, we just insert the key. We remember that we have grown by one element and then we write our note to the disk. So this is the simple thing when we are at the leaf. When we are not at the leaf, then we might have to traverse to a child to insert the new key. Right? Okay, so how can we do that? Well, the first thing is we look for where we have to go. So between which two elements is our key. That's the same like in the loop before. So we first look for where the key actually has to go. This is the first while loop in lines 9 and 10. And then we need to get the child where we have to go. We have to read the child where we have to insert our key. Now, once we've read the child, we know whether the child is full or not. Right? When we had a new full child, we know that we have to split it. Which is what the next thing is doing. So if the child is full, we split the child. And then we have to decide whether we go to the left or we go to the right of these two. So we know that we have to traverse to this child, but we have to decide whether we have to go to the new left child or to go to the new right child. This is what the next if is doing. And then we're actually traversing to the child that we've chosen. So either it's the child that we read from disk because that was already there. Or it's one of the two split nodes. Which one is what the if here decides. And then we're going down. And then everything starts from the beginning. And because we've split the child before we're going down, we again know that the new node is not full. Right? So the recursion always goes to a node that is not full. Because before we enter the recursion at the root node, we split the root node if the root node is full. And here before we go down in the recursion, we split the child node if the child node is full. So we know that all the nodes that we actually enter are not full. Okay? So this is how the recursion goes down until we're at the leaf. And at the end, we're inserting the new key again at the leaf. Because we're traversing down until we hit the leaf. Where we have to insert it. So inserting is done at leaves. But splitting is done while we're going down. So that's the same thing about like in binary trees. So if we insert new keys, the new keys are always inserted at leaf nodes. But we don't in contrast to binary trees, we don't create the new leaf node to insert the thing. But we create the leaf node first by splitting it where we can insert it. Okay? Okay? So this is how binary, how B trees do their insert operation. And why is this the case? Well, we want to minimize the disk reads that we have to do. Because we once read the child from disk. We have to do a risk. But even if we split it, both the child, both the children are still in memory. Because we've just split them. And we don't have to reread them. So we only have at most one disk read in every traversal that we're going down. So insert, the hard operation is reading. So insert takes at most as many disk reads as we need as we have height of the tree as before. Right? The only thing that can happen is that we grow to the top. Well, this is a bit. And in the first situation, we don't have to reread the root node from disk because it's still in memory when we split it. So therefore, we only have as many disk reads as we have traversals as if height of the tree in every case. Okay, is this clear? Great. So this is how inserting a tree, an element into a tree works. Now, deleting an element from a tree is a bit more complicated as before. So let's look at this speed tree here, which is a simple one. So what we want to do is we have this large tree. And what we want to do is we want to delete elements. We want to delete elements from the tree. And the simplest case is if we want to delete the key that is in a leaf node. Because if we want to delete a key that is in a leaf node, then we can just delete this entry in the leaf node. And then we have two possibilities. The first possibility is it's the last element. No, not. It's not the last element. The number of elements drops below the T minus one or it does not drop below the T minus one. Right. So if it does not drop below the T minus one, then we can just delete it and nothing happens. If it drops below the T minus one, we have to do something about it. Because then we would have a node that is too small. Right. Okay. So. The other case is that we want to delete an entry and a key that is actually in an interior node. Right. Because if we want to delete the key that is in an interior node, suddenly the number of children is wrong. We have to put the children somewhere. So we have to rearrange the children. That means that we have several different cases. So one case is that we can simply delete it. This is the simple case. A case one. The second case is we want to delete the M in the intermediate node. Well, if you want to delete the M in the intermediate node, the M splits the children, J, K, L and N, O. So M is the key that distinguishes between the keys in the child before the M and the child after the M. So we need to find a new key that actually splits these two branches. But it is clear which key splits these two branches. It is either the highest key of the left one or the smallest key of the right one. And we can take any of those to lift it up and just remove it from the from the thing below. But what we have to do is we have to rearrange the children. So this is something we must forget. So this is case two A. Then we have different other cases like we want to delete the G, which is the middle node here. Right. So if you want to delete the middle node, then we get two new nodes. But we would have to get these two together. But these two together are too big. So we don't get a really large one. So we have to make sure that something happens there. So if we if we delete the G here, if we delete the G here and we have to make sure that something doesn't nothing evil happens. So let's go through all the cases. So the first thing, of course, what we do is we want it if we want to delete the node, we have to search for the key first because we're deleting something with the key. So we need to know where the key actually is. So we search for the key first. And the first the first nice thing is what can happen is if the search arrives at a leaf node, then we can in principle just delete. The key from the leaf node. We can we have to repair the B3 property afterwards, but we can delete the key just from. If it if we're an internal node, then the key is sits at the position I. Right. And so if the key is equal to the Ith key, we can have three. Three different possibilities. The node that we're in actually the child of the node that we're in has T keys. That's the first one. The other one, it has T minus one keys and the other child has T keys at me at least T keys. And the third possibilities that none of this happens. So both CI and CI plus one have exactly T minus one keys. Right. So first we have two children. One has T minus one keys and the other has T keys. No, the first one is the first key. The first child has at least T keys. The second one is the first child has T minus one keys, but the second child has at least T keys. And the third possibilities. Both children have T minus one keys. Why is this important? Why is this important? Well, if at least one of the children has T keys, we can transfer one key up. and then both children have at least t minus one keys but if both children have t minus one keys we cannot transfer a key up we have to do something else right what you have to do is we have to merge the children into one child that is large right because we cannot transfer a key if we delete and it's probably something i did to to draw it so here we have the keys and we have the children so c0 c1 c2 c3 and we want to remove that key right so if you want to remove that key we need something that distinguishes these two children and we've just discussed there's two possibilities either the largest key of this child or the smallest key of this child so either the largest q of this child is going up or the smallest key of this child is going up to distinguish these two children but this can only happen as we discussed if either of these two children has at least t keys because then it has at least t minus one keys what a p3 has to satisfy the bad situation is if both children are smallest possible because then we cannot transfer a key up from neither of the two children right but what happens then is both of them have size t minus one so we can combine them to get a node that has two t minus two elements which is smaller than two t minus one and we can just remove the element up there so if both of them are small we just make a large node out of both of them and remove the key and then we have only one child left that the child is smaller than the largest child possible than the largest thing possible so these are the three situations if this is large enough we transfer the largest key from here up to distinguish these two children if this is small as possible we cannot use the largest key from here but if this is larger then we can use the smallest key from here to transfer it up if both children are small then they are so small that we can combine them into one child and just remove the key up there okay so these are the three cases is this clear so these are the three cases that are possible the third case of course is we arrive at an internal node that does not contain the key so that means that we have to continue searching down to do the key and so this is basically one of the three cases 3a and 3b so if we trend if we pass through a node then we have to check something um if x when now now now it that's the most complicated case okay that's coming now um why because we would have to repair our tree because what could happen is that if we delete something we could end up with a node that has less than t minus one elements and if that happened what we had to do is we had to repair the key going back up again so we want to avoid that so we want to pre-repair the key while we are going down so this can never happen okay right so that means that whenever we transfer the search or we would transfer the search to a child that has only t minus one elements left then something down there has to be deleted and in the worst case it would be a key inside the child which would make the child too small so we try to do something before that happens so we check whether the child that we are going to has only t minus one keys but has one of its siblings next to each other so if we want to delete the node something from that child we can check whether the siblings of that child actually have more keys than the minimal amount of keys if for example that neighbor has one key more we can transfer the smallest key from that to be the largest key from that we can just move the keys right so like this we can just transfer the keys this one moves up this one moves down so we can transfer the keys the only thing that is bad is if both children if both siblings of that child have only t minus one elements but then we can again combine them into one child that is large but but not too large this is case 3b so the first thing is we check whether the child is already smallest so just the other way around like in insert in insert we checked whether the child was already biggest and preemptively we just split it and here we do the other way around so we check whether the child is already smallest possible and if it's smallest possible we repair right away so what we check is we check whether we check its two neighbors and if the two neighbors the number of elements of any of these two neighbors is at least t then we transfer keys so that the child that we're traversing to has at least t elements right so how do we traverse the key well we can traverse this smallest key up and that key down so that moves the keys in that direction doesn't change the sequence um we only have to put the last child from here the first child from here to be the last child from there and then this node has these t keys keys and so we can freely delete if we want to um if both neighbors have only t minus one elements then we can safely combine them again to be a node that has two t minus two elements right so this is um actually no if you don't delete it has two t minus one elements because we have to transfer that key down in addition okay so those are the two cases this case 3a is that the children has t minus one keys and has an immediate sibling and the other case is that both all the all the siblings that are adjacent to each other and where we traverse have t minus one keys and then we have to merge them to be a larger one and that ensures that whenever we go to a child the child has more than t minus one elements and so if we want to delete we can delete okay so this is the way the delete operation works and one of the problems for the exercises class is to write this down as a pseudocode and it's problem 100 so no it's it's it's a good it's i think explaining it is quite difficult and so the best thing to learn how it works is to sit down and write it up yourself yeah that's a really good no that's a really important thing you can try it's really not you have to go through all the cases check them and then think what happens if you want to combine them and think what happens if you if you transfer the keys and the delete operation is um is non-trivial enough that that that you know how to manage a p3 after you've done it once so this is an exercise you should do once because if you've done it once you will forever know how p3 works so that's one that's why it's one of the problems okay they have to think about it okay great so this is about p3 and so what's the time we have um 15 minutes left and we're going to the next class of the next chapter sorry so it's important so for data scientists it's really important to understand how p3 work because they are at the heart of many data science storage problems so whenever you do data science and and you have to organize your data what p3 what p3 pop up at every place they're really really very frequently used in data science problems okay so the next thing we're talking about are graph algorithms which is in la the next large chapter in the lecture so Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
