Welcome to the lecture course, final sprints until the semester ends. Yesterday, or yesterday, last time, we started with graph algorithms. Sorry. So last time we started with graphs. We have already defined what directed and undirected graphs are. And last time we've seen representation possibilities for graphs, the adjacency list representation and the adjacency matrix representation. So we've discussed that last time. And today, we're going to discuss the two basic, most important algorithms for graphs. And both of these are usually used to construct other algorithms based on these principles for solving various graph-related problems. And the two algorithms that we're going to discuss are breadth-first search and depth-first search. Both of them look for structure of the graph. They start usually at one node and then from that node on try to detect all the other nodes. There is one small distinction, which is that breadth-first search usually only reaches or only discovers those nodes in a graph that are reachable from the starting node. While depth-first search usually visits every single node in the graph, even if the graph is disconnected. And in order to understand how this works, we probably start best by looking at an image of a graph and what breadth-first search is doing. So, let me... Okay. Well, that's not what I want. Well, more or less I do want it. Okay. Come on. Windows. I love Windows. So, okay. Okay. Great. Now. And I need to turn off the lights to 2 and I have to display the image. Okay. Somehow it doesn't want to. Oh, yeah. Now it starts. Okay. Let's see. Oh, yeah. There we are. Okay. Okay. So, we start with a very simple graph that is on the lower left-hand side and the node in the middle will be the node where we start breadth-first search from. And breadth-first search is something like when you're in a lake and you throw a stone into the water. Or then you usually see circular waves starting from there. And this is basically how breadth-first search works. Whenever you're sitting at a node, then it first considers all of its neighbors. And whenever a node is first detected. So, in the beginning, all nodes are white. Whenever a node is first detected, it turns gray. And when all of its neighbors have been finished, then it turns black. And so on. So, this is basically the idea. So, if we look at the picture and we can see how the wave actually expands. So, first, we're at the center node. And the center node is immediately detected. So, it turns gray. And then it considers all of its neighbors, which are these nodes that turn gray now. So, we are at the second image. And since all of its neighbors have been detected now, the node itself turns black. And then we shift our attention to one of the neighbor nodes. Here, the node R. One of the gray nodes. Now, we start detecting their neighbors. And so, the neighbors of R are S again. But we've seen S already because it's black. And then we also detect W and we detect T. Both of them turn gray because we are expanding. We've just detected them. And R, since all of its neighbors have been explored, turns black next. Right? So, then, as you can see within the graph, the nodes are partitioned into three different kinds of nodes. The nodes that have been already discovered. The nodes that are just in the working phase, which is the frontier, which is encircled in yellow, which consists of all the gray nodes. And then those that are still outside of the wave. So, where the wave has not yet reached. Right? So, we have the main wave, which is the gray nodes. Then we have that which is inside of the wave, which is black. And then we have something that's outside of the wave, which is white. So, let's see. We're always looking at the gray nodes. And we're always looking at the gray nodes that have the lowest number. So, this is the second thing Bread First Search is doing. It's basically counting how many hops we have taken from the source route to that specific node. So, the source node has zero, as you can see, written in the upper left corner. Then the first nodes that have been discovered by looking at the neighbors of zero, they all got number one. They have one hop away from zero. And then the next wave, which started at R, has the nodes T and W there. They have a hop more. So, they have number two. And we are always continuing with nodes with the lower number. So, the next number will either be V or U. It doesn't matter. So, we continue with U. That means we consider both neighbors. Well, there is only one neighbor that is white, which is the Y there. The Y is white. All the others are already colored. So, we increase Y by one from U, which is also two. So, Y turns gray as well. And then there is only one node left with hop count one, which is V. But V has both of its neighbors already detected. So, it just turns black. And then we continue. The front is now the large circle. And now we continue all the other nodes. The first node that had been discovered from R with number two is T. So, T looks at its neighbors. All of them are already colored black or gray. So, it turns black itself. Then we continue from there. The next node is W, right? So, W does have a new neighbor, which is X and Z. So, both of them turn gray. W itself turns black. And then we continue from there. The next node is Y because it has a two. And so, Y turns black because all its neighbors are already detected. And then X and then Z. And then we're done. So, this is how breadth-first search works. And now the question is how to implement that efficiently. And it's implemented using that algorithm. So, to store the gray nodes, we use a Q, which is the Q is Q. So, every new node that is detected is put into the Q at the end of the Q. And all the nodes on the front of the Q. The node on the front of the Q is the node that is used next for work, for its neighbor search. And, of course, in the beginning, the starting node is in the Q. So, that's what the node is doing in the beginning. First, we turn all the nodes white. We set their distance to infinity. And then we set something which is called U.py to nil. And we will discuss what U.py is doing after we look through the algorithm. Okay. So, we start with the search node, which is S. So, the breadth-first search on the graph G, starting from node S, turns S to gray, as we've discussed, and turns its distance to itself to zero. And S.py is nil, is still nil. We've just initialized everything to nil, except for S. So, also, its parent is nil. And the Q is starting empty. And then we enqueue S in Q. So, that's what I said. All the gray nodes are in the QQ. And so, we put the first gray node, which is the starting search node, into the Q. And then we iterate through the Q until the Q is empty. Because if the Q is empty, then we're finished, and we've discovered all the nodes that are reachable from our starting node S. So, we are starting. Let's get a bit bigger. Okay. So, and now what is the loop doing? Well, of course, as I said, it's taking the first node from the Q, which is basically the oldest gray node that has been put into the Q. So, we remove the oldest gray node from the Q. And then we're looking through every neighbor of the vertex of the adjacency list U. So, G.adjacency of U means we look at all the adjacent elements of U, which is a set, basically, or a list. So, we are looking through all the neighbors. And then we check whether the neighbor is actually white, has not yet been detected. If it's white, has not yet been detected, we turn it gray. We increase. So, we set the hop count to one higher than our own hop count, which is U.T. And as you can see, we set the .py of that node to ourselves. And then we put the newly discovered gray node into the Q. And at the end, when we're finished, we turn ourselves black. Then the loop continues. So, what is this pi doing then? Well, as we can see, the pi member of the initial node is nil. And then we remember for every white node from which node we've actually reached it. Right? Since every node is detected only once, every node has a specific parent pi. So, if we draw then the connection between all of these nodes, what we get is a tree. Right? Because every node is reachable once. We can't come back because every node that had been detected before that is either gray or black. And so, it only contains white nodes. So, whenever we use the pi operations to go from one node to the other, it will always traverse nodes that had been white at the time when the pi member was set properly. And so, what this is is a tree. So, we construct a tree where the pi is the parent operation. And this tree is the one that actually tells us something about the structure of the graph. And so, just a second. I'm trying to look to find the tree for the graph. Well, there we are. So, if we look at the graph itself, we see a few nodes that are painted in blue. I have to go a bit smaller so that we can see everything. Right? So, just look at the graph again. What we see is when we start at the root node, at the search node, which is the starting node, S in the middle, what we can see is every node that is between the node that we're working on and the new white node is colored in blue. So, let's look at the algorithm again. And this is the pi relation. So, the first nodes are going to R, V, and U. And they're actually colored in blue. Right? And then we continue from there. The next one is R. R has two neighbors that are white in the beginning. And so, the nodes are colored blue. Then the next node is U. U has only one neighbor that is white, which is Y. So, this node, this edge is colored blue again. And so on. Then we are only cascading through nodes that are already painted. So, we don't get new blue nodes, new blue edges anywhere. The next blue edge is starting when we come to W, which has two white neighbors, X and Z. So, this has two new blue nodes, blue edges, sorry. And that's it. Then the blue edges don't grow anymore. And if we look at the final graph down there, what we can see is S is the root of a tree. So, these are children of S. And so, what we can do is, in principle, we can draw this graph. So, we have S here. Right? Then its first children are R, U, and V. So, it has three children, R, U, and V. Right? Then R has two children, which are T and W. And U has a child, which is Y. V doesn't have a child anymore. So, at V it stops. But W has two children, X and Z. And if we look at the numbers, what we can basically see is that S has level zero. Right? So, R, U, and V are the only ones that have numbers that have depth one. Then T, W, and Y both have depth two. And the final ones, X and Z, have depth three. So, the depth in this tree records how far away from the initial search node S the corresponding nodes are. So, those are the things that we construct if we're doing the breadth first search. And this is the breadth first search tree. And we call these, of course, the nodes up there. We call the predecessor nodes. So, this is a predecessor tree. And the definition is just we add an edge whenever this is a gray node and this is a white node. So, whenever we find a new white node from a gray node. So, the first time a node is discovered in the search. So, this is the term that we use. Whenever we reach a white node, we discover the node. And whenever the node is discovered, we remember from which node we started to actually discover that node. Of course, this tree is not necessarily unique because if we go through the gray nodes in a different order, if we go through the children to the neighbors in a different order, we can get a different tree. But what we don't get is – so, let's look at that if we're going back to our tree. Whenever we look at this situation, then – Okay. Everybody's leaving at the same time. If we're looking at that situation, then what we can see is that – just think that we didn't start at R, right? At the neighbor R. So, if we had started with the neighbor V, for example, yeah? Let's say first hop is V. Then the first – this would be the first edge. But the next edges would have been W and Y starting from V. So, in reality, the whole graph would look differently, right? So, let's look at what the graph looks like if we take a different sequence of the neighbors. So, here we started on the top left and basically went counterclockwise. So, what happens if we do it differently? So, what happens if we do it differently? If we do it differently, the first note when we start with S, we still get as its neighbors, the original neighbors, which are U and V. But let's do them the other way around. So, let's say we have V, we have U, and we have R, right? So, now the next – the first note that we're looking at would have been V. And V has two undiscovered neighbors, which are Y and W. So, we would have children Y and W from V. And then we would have been going to U. U has a new neighbor, which is T. So, we would have had T here. And R wouldn't have had any white neighbor. Well, and then we would go through Y, W, and T. But Y already would have only colored neighbors. T would have only colored neighbors. But W, again, would have our X and Z. And so, what we can see, the tree would have looked differently. Oh, yeah. I didn't see that. Sorry. Y would have had X as its neighbor. Yeah. So, Y would have had X. I didn't see the link. Sorry. Yeah. Y would have had X as its neighbor, right? And that's it. And W would have had Z. Yes. Oh, yeah. So, the tree would have looked completely different. And what would not have looked completely different, is the depth of the respective nodes, right? Why? Because what breadth-first search is doing, it's always discovering the shortest path from the search node to the respective node that we're looking at. And that means that the depth of the nodes in the tree, which basically records the length of the shortest path from the initial node to that node, this is unique. So, we will never have a different layer structure. So, the layers will always be the same. But the edges connecting these layers, they depend on the sequence in which we actually run through the neighbors of a node. Okay. So, now, why is this the case? So, why is our search actually detecting the shortest path? Well, this is basically quite simple. So, let me turn back to the blackboard. Let's turn this off, and let's get it dark and not dark again. We've been learning how this works. Okay. So, what is the important property? Well, the important property is that that breadth-first search, so BFS breadth-first search, computes the shortest path distance to the initial node. And the shortest path distance is uniquely determined. That's the smallest number of edges that we have to traverse in order to get from the initial node to the respective node. And this is defined as being infinity if the node is not reachable by path. And so, that's the reason why breadth-first search initially initializes all of the nodes with distance infinity. So that if we never discover them, the distance stays at infinity. And why is this the case? Well, there is, this is basically provable. So, in the first lemma, 20.1 says, then whenever we have a directed or undirected graph, and whenever we start with an arbitrary vertex, then for every edge, U and V, so if G, V is a graph, as I said, directed or undirected, doesn't matter, and S is an arbitrary vertex, it's in V, then the distance, the shortest graph distance, delta. This is the shortest path distance. Then, if UV is an edge E, or UV is an E, depending on whether, oh, I write it differently, as I've actually defined it. So, if UV is an edge, if UV is an edge, then the shortest path distance from S to V is at most the shortest path distance from S to U plus one. Well, this is quite trivial. I just say why this is. Well, if V is reachable from S by some path, then it is also reachable through U through U from S because that's an additional edge. And if U is reachable in distance delta SU, then V has to be reachable at least in delta SU plus one steps because that we're going the shortest path to U and then the additional hop along the edge UV to V. so the shortest path has to be shorter than that or at most that I think this is obvious so we don't have to continue from there. So this is trivial. Okay, so this is the first lemma which is important. The next lemma is that whenever we have a graph and whenever we run the bread first search on G, then what we also have which is the next one is lemma 20.2 so we have again a tree a graph, sorry. So if G, V is a graph a graph and S is a vertex from which we start and assume a bread first first search is run from the node S so like what we did before then for every vertex the V of D is at least then for every then for every V in V V dot D is greater or equal delta S V always during the bread first search. So V of D changes its value during the run but no matter how it changes always we will have that value of V of D will be at least the value of the shortest path from the length of the shortest path from S to V and this is also trivial. So why is this the case? Well in the beginning V of D is infinity which is greater or equal than the distance which is clear and then the rest is basically by induction. Whenever we are at a white vertex this is the only point when the D changes. It only changes when a white vertex is discovered during the search. That's exactly when D changes. D is only set once and this is when we hit a white vertex from a gray vertex and so whatever happens is that we have just reached the white vertex via path because we always hop along distances along edges meaning that and then we increase every time the distance by one whenever we hop an edge and so that means that we have actually found a path this is the path right and so every this every every depth in the tree corresponds to a hop corresponds to an edge so we did find a path so the shortest path can only be shorter than that so we did find a path of some length the length is d and so the shortest path cannot be longer so this is also quite trivial we don't really need induction to prove that okay so now it becomes a bit more complicated the next thing is and this is something what we can see during the working there is the queue that we are working with in the breadth first search the queue only contains two different types of vertices vertices whose distance is k and vertices whose distance is k plus one but never other ones it only contains two different distances and the shorter ones are first and the longer ones are in the back of the queue so this is the next thing that we are going to prove so whenever we are in a breadth first search which is lemma 23 we again have a graph so let g equals ve be a graph we can have our source node and assume that we are running bf bread first search on g starting from s then if the queue contains vertices then the v1 to vr are in the queue and actually in that sequence right so if this is the queue and vi are in of course vertices then for all i equals 1 to r minus 1 we have that vi is smaller vi dot d is smaller equal vi plus 1 dot d so they're sorted in ascending order and what is also important if we compare the first element in the queue and the last element in the queue are dot distance is smaller equal v1 dot distance plus 1 so the last element in the queue and the first element in the queue are always at least at most one hop apart okay and this is basically an induction step but the induction step in full is written in the book so you can read it we will do a reasoning a simpler reasoning so why is this the case well basically what happens is whenever we are at the note we are putting all of its neighbors into the queue so when we start we only have the neighbors in the queue that are actually the neighbors of the initial search notice and then from there on we always take the smallest element out of the queue the oldest element out of the queue and we put all the new elements into the back right so that means that whatever we've taken out what we take back into the queue has a hop that is one higher than what we've just taken out right and the oldest element is the one that has been reached first from the queue from the search node right this has been reached first from the search node which means that all the notes that are later in the queue have been reached after the first one right however we've never put anything inside that is less than one distance away from where we started right the last elements in the queue so therefore we always first look at nodes that have been reached first in the search and whatever we've put inside is at least one hop more in the distance that means we cannot have ever anything in between that has been reached later because of the ordering of the queue and since we're always putting stuff in there that is only one higher the distance between the first and the last can be at most one that's basically the reason why this happens but you can also prove it by induction okay now if both VI and VJ are both enqueued during the execution of the breadth first search that of course means that the distance is smaller than the other one which is corollary corollary 20.4 I leave the let G graph and so if BFS and Qs VI and VJ but this is VI and VJ then and VI is enqueued before VJ and Q before VJ then VI distance is smaller or equal VJ distance which is obvious just from what we had before and this all together allows us to produce the following theorem which is theorem 20.5 and here we start because it's a theorem again with the full formulation so we have a graph VE then we have a node S a vertex S in V then we assume that breadth first search starts from S assume that BFS is being run from S now let V be an arbitrary vertex in V then V of D is equal to delta VS at the end of the algorithm and in addition now we're also talking about the pi's so if any vertex is reachable from S if any if any if any if V is reachable from S then one of the shortest paths from S to V is given by the edges that are defined in this tree here the edges are running from phi to P to V to pi is given by the edges V pi as recorded in the algorithm okay well let's prove that and basically the idea is a proof by contradiction so let's prove that using dilemmas above so let's first assume that we have a vertex where D is not equal to its shortest path distance so assume that V in V satisfies that V of D is not equal to delta SV D okay if this is the case then there is a vertex that has the minimal shortest path from S where this is violated because we only have finitely many of them and since we only have finitely many of them we can look at all the vertices that satisfy that their D value is not equal to the shortest path distance so we can look at all of them and take one where the shortest path distance is minimal so without loss of generality V has minimal delta SV among all such nodes so we have a node that has minimal shortest path distance and its D value is not the same then what is clear is that V cannot be the source node because the source node has distance zero which is the shortest path distance of S to zero which means that then V is not equal to S this is obvious and what we also know from lemma 20.2 is that V dot D has to be strictly bigger than delta SV right because we know that it's always greater equal the value so it cannot be smaller and V dot D is strictly bigger than delta SV so this is also clear okay well now what we can do is we can now look at the vertex that now we do know that there exists a shortest path so let you let you in V be the vertex that precedes V on the shortest path from S to V right so there is a shortest path so this shortest path has to run through U by construction of V we know that U dot D is the same as delta SU because delta SU is at least one smaller than V because the shortest path is running through U so the shortest path to V could contain the shortest path to U but has to be even shorter so since delta SU has to be strictly smaller than delta SV we know that U dot D is equal to delta SU because this cannot be a contradiction note and what we also know is that the shortest path to V because it's a shortest path has to be the length also we know that delta SV has to be equal to delta SU plus one we cannot be shorter because otherwise we could have gone three well but now we know that V dot D is bigger than U dot D plus one all these things together imply that V dot D is bigger than U dot D plus one and now all of these things lead to contradiction because there is a point in the breadth first search algorithm when U is removed from the queue right so what could happen there is only three possibilities the three possibilities when U is removed from the queue is that V is white that V is gray or that V is black that's the only possibility is because nodes are either white gray or black so whenever so when U is D queued V needs to have one color needs to have a color a color so only three possibilities we have the first possibility we have is that V is white so if V is white if V is white then V dot D has to be U dot T plus one by the algorithm which is impossible because V dot D is bigger than U dot T plus one so if V is white then V dot T is equal to U dot T plus one which doesn't work so this is a contradiction because V dot T is bigger than U dot T plus one so V cannot be white that means that V has to be either gray or it has to be black if V is gray if V is gray and U is just the Q then V is in the Q right so if V is gray V is in the Q if V is gray V is in Q but that implies by lemma 20 dot 3 that V dot T has to be small or equal U dot T plus one right so this is lemma 23 that means V dot T is small or equal U dot T plus one which is also a contradiction because it's bigger than U dot T plus one that means that V must have been black but that means that V has already been removed from the Q before you but if V is removed from the Q before you it has to be smaller V dot T has to be smaller than U plus smaller equal U dot T so if V is black V dot T is smaller or equal U dot T which is also a contradiction and so V cannot have had any color which is not possible in the algorithm and so we finished and so indeed red first search always finds the shortest path and this is why this predecessor tree looks like this and that the pies are actually the edges the shortest edges is obvious it's just because we just hopped there in exactly V dot these steps and so what we have just constructed is the red first tree which is using these pies which is a subset of all the edges and this is called the predecessor sub graph or the red first tree so this is called the predecessor sub graph or red first tree starting at s being pi okay so this was the first important algorithm algorithm it is breadth first search the second important algorithm is depth first search and in order to understand how it works we again look at an image of a graph oh sorry you're still copying just copy sorry whenever you finish just tell me and then I turn off the lights but at least turn on the projector okay we're starting with the tree from or with the graph in the upper left corner again and in contrast to breadth first search that basically works like a wave along the whole graph where the front propagates outwards from the search node along the edges along the edges depth first search always goes to the children before looking for other things so when it discovers a child it goes to the child immediately so like greedy and then when it's reached the child it first looks through the children of the child to the first child of the child and so on so it always goes to the descendants first so it looks to explore the graph as fast as possible by hopping from one child to the next and so what we can see is here in the upper left corner we start at the node U and I think everybody has copied now so I can turn off the light so that you can see more so the lower the upper left corner we start and we look at descendants now what we have is a directed graph doesn't matter both of the algorithm work for both so here we take as an example a directed graph so we take the first child of the node U which is the node V and we are hopping there and we coloring it gray so again we color a node black if we have worked through all the children of the respective node and we color it gray whenever we have reached it for the first time so the first thing is we coloring the initial node where we start with gray and then we are hopping to the child and the first child is V and we immediately color it gray but instead of going to X now what bread first would be doing we are hopping to V and we are looking at the children of V and the first child of V is Y so we are hopping to Y immediately and color Y gray and we are looking at the neighbors of Y well the next neighbor of Y is X so we hopping to X and color X gray and focus our attention to X okay then we look at X and look at all the children of X well the children of X there is V only but V is gray so we've already been at V so we finished the child and then we've considered all the possible children of X which means that we color X black okay the next thing is now we've colored X black which means we return to its parent the parent of X is Y and we check whether all of the children all of the neighbors of Y are already black if all the children of Y are black then we color Y black because the only child is X so the only descendant is X so we color Y black meaning that we continue going back to its parent its parent was V and now we check whether all the children of V all the neighbors of V are black they are because V is only neighbor Y so we are back at V and color V black and so on then we hop back to U we have seen that all the children now we focus our attention to U and check all the children of U well all the descendants are V and X both of them are black meaning that U is also black okay U doesn't have a predecessor because we started at U meaning we are looking for the first new white note that we have not yet seen well by chance this is W so we started W color W gray and look at all of the children well the first child is Y which is already black so we don't have to do anything then we are looking at the next child which is Z so we are going to Z focus our attention to Z and then we can even have loops so edges that point to themselves so we're looking at that the child Z is its own child so we don't have to hop there again and then all the children of Z are already done black which means we have to color Z black and then we're hopping back to W all of the children of W are black so we're coloring W black and we're finished so this is how depth first search looks so it goes and goes to children children children and only hops back if all the neighbors of a node are black then it hops back to where we came from this is written here so we are doing depth first search on our tree and again we're filling a pi no a pi relation so the first thing we're doing again is before we're initializing every vertex to white and pi being the parent being nil and then we are calculating the time that it took us to get there so we set the time to zero and then we're going through every vertex in the graph and whenever the vertex is white we start a depth first search from that vertex since we recoloring as you've seen recursively all the nodes during the algorithm this top loop only finds vertices that have not been reached from any of the other vertices we started with so those are only the like this is the W vertex and the U vertex of the example before! and now we have the recursive procedure that is the depth first search visit that starts at the node view and in the graph G and the first thing we do is we are increasing the time by one whenever we are in the recursive procedure and we record how long it has taken for us to actually discover the node which is U.D so that's the discovery time that we are calculating whenever we are at the node we are coloring it gray as we seen before and then we are going to the adjacency list of that node again and whenever we white neighbor then we are visiting we are calling the visit from that white neighbor right so we are going down and down and down as long as we can do that so we are going through all the white neighbors and then whenever we finished running through all the neighbors we increase the time by one we set the time to the finish time the finish time is the time u.f and then we color ourselves black and we return to our parent and then our parent will go through all the notes so this is this this is the depth first search procedure and what we can do we can also gain some additional structural information from the graph while we are doing our depth first search procedure the first hint is the time so we record the starting time whenever we are at the note and then we are recording the finish time whenever we finished all of our children that produces a time interval for every note between the start and the end and of course by construction the end time is always larger than the starting time because we always increase it by one so every note for every note we have an interval whenever we have discovered it the first time we have the discovery time the t and whenever we have finished looking at the note we have the finish time which is u dot f and we can also see they differ at least by one because after discovering before finishing we increase the time also by one and time is a global variable so it's increased whenever we visit a note now what we also get going back to our graph what you can also see is all the edges that are here in the graph have one of four letters assigned to them right some of them are t edges some of them are b edges some of them are like here we have t edges then here we have b edges and if we look at the last graph down there every edge does have a designator either a t or an f or a b or a c right so those are all the possible edge so what are the different edges that we are looking at first as before we have recorded our pi relation so again as before we are constructing a tree and this tree consists of all the discovery edges that we are gone so whenever we went from a node to a white node as before we record the edge and make it blue so those are the tree edges and if you're looking at the final graph this is again some sort of tree it's not really a tree because it doesn't have a single root right it has two different roots it has the root u and it has the root w so what it is is a forest a collection of trees so the depth first search is a forest the depth first forest and the breadth first tree and so the tree edges are the ones that are the T so those are the ones that went from a node to the other node when it was initially white then we have other edges they are differing by two things whenever we are at the node and going to a gray node back to a gray node then we put the B to the edge like here like here we were at X and went to V and V was already in the list which means that we discovered V before X in the depth first search meaning that the node that the edge from X to V is pointing back in the search so this is a backwards node in contrast to this node which is going from U to X because that means that the search had already finished at X meaning that U is again going forward in the search so this is a forward node so all the nodes that are going from a parent to an already black child black descendant is a forward node so we have backward nodes B and we have forward nodes and all the other nodes that are neither three nodes nor forward nodes nor backward nodes are so called cross nodes which is this one so a cross node is basically a node that's going to the other tree whenever we've started a new search so they're going cross between the parts of the tree so we have here in the forest the nodes U V Y and X and in one tree of the forest we have U V Y and X and another tree of the forest W and Z and the cross node is going from one tree in the forest to another tree in the forest that's a so called cross node so those are the nodes the various node types in a graph so we again have a tree which is recorded just whenever we are hopping to a new white node then we constructing our tree but if we're going from a node to a grey node then this will be a backward node if we're going from a node to a black node this will be a forward node or a cross node that's something we do not yet know but this is something that we can detect later so during search we cannot distinguish cross nodes and forward when we're looking at the connected components of the forest okay so are there any questions about how this works right so you start at a white node you're going to the adjacent nodes first but instead for going through all the adjacent nodes you're hopping right away to the next adjacent node which is white whenever it's white we're recording the node as a tree node and then we're going from and we're only going back to the parent when we've colored the adjacent node black and before we do that we're going to the adjacent node first and so on so we're going depth first in the tree and not breadth first in the tree that's why it's called depth first search not breadth first search okay so what are the important properties of breadth of depth first search yes oh yeah that's the sorry let's go there again the numbers inside the node that the first and the second number are the start time and the finish time that we're going through in the algorithm so as you can see we started at time one with node u then we're hopping to v which increases the time counter by one so we are at time two in v then we're hopping to three we're increasing the counter again by one to three then we're hopping to x we're increasing the counter again by one to four and then we have we don't have to visit any child of x which means that the finish time is five then we're going back to y we don't have to finish anything so the finish time is six we're going back to v the finish time is seven we're going back to u the finish time is eight and then we're hopping to w which is the new starting time is one more is nine and then we're hopping from w to z making 11 then we're hopping back to w making the finishing time 12 so the two numbers in there are the starting and finishing time respectively of the nodes and what we can see is these starting and finishing times they're producing intervals and these intervals actually enclose the other nodes so we've started in u and ended in u the first graph right and so u has the widest interval which is 1 8 and all of its descendants in the tree have smaller intervals like the next descendant v has 2 7 the next one 3 6 the next one 4 5 so they're nested intervals within each other and the next tree has a new interval 9 to 12 so the first tree has interval 1 to 8 and the root note tells you it's between 1 and 8 and the root note of the next tree which is w has the interval 9 to 12 so the root notes of the trees have the largest intervals! they started first and finished at the end okay so let's go back to the blackboard I have to make it dark again okay okay great so yeah what we talk at the end is also about the running times and now let's analyze running times of depth first search and breadth first search well both of the algorithms have the same property they visit every vertex exactly once because they visit every vertex exactly when it is white and since immediately after visiting it's turned gray every vertex is visited exactly once and since every vertex is visited exactly once every edge starting from that vertex is also traversed exactly once because we only go once through the adjacency of that specific vertex so the best thing what we can have is that in a directed graph every edge is visited exactly once in a non-directed graph every edge is visited at most twice which means that the running time of both of the algorithms is on the order of v plus e so running time for DFS and BFS is all of v plus e so the number of hops we take is at most one for every vertex and one for every edge what are the properties of depth first search and properties of the most important is the so-called parenthesis theorem which is theorem 27 and it's basically something we've discovered already and we've discussed already and this is whenever we're doing depth first search on a graph so if g equals v e is a graph and we run depth first search on it then we have the following two properties if u and v are both vertices v and b are both vertices then either if u dot d u dot f intersection with v dot d v dot f is empty so if the intervals are empty neither u neither u is a descendant of v nor v of u in the depth first search forest so that's the first thing if they're disjoint and the other hand is if the so this is if u dot d and u dot f intersection with v dot d and v dot f is non empty then either then u dot d u dot f is a subset of v dot d v dot f or v dot d v dot f is a subset of u dot d u dot f in the first case u is a descendant of v in the depth first search forest in the second case v is a descendant of u well the proof is more or less obvious by algorithm right so this is exactly how the times are set because u dot d is set before we go through to the white nodes and the descendants are just the white nodes and we increase the d time whenever we visit a node and whenever we leave a node we increase the time again to get the f time so never even are two times recorded that are the same because it's always increased by one which means that the intervals have to be contained in each other completely or they're completely disjoint because no two numbers in the tree are ever the same by the algorithm and whenever we get the next higher number we've just reached it by hop or after finishing the whole tree so this is quite obvious that this is true why is this then called the parenthesis theorem well it's called the parenthesis theorem because what you could do is you can whenever you visit a note you can print an open parenthesis and then you print the note and then whenever you leave the note you can print the close parenthesis and what you get is a completely correctly parenthesized expression and I give you an example again from the note from the tree or from one of the trees that we're looking at which is on the projection now so let's have a look again at that tree so we start with the node S and doing a depth first search so depth first search is hopping here it's going to Z then it's going to Y then it's going to X and Z because this is again a back pointer so we are returning then going from Z to W which is a new tree edge and we're going back and back and then we're having the other forest so this looks very much like the same tree as before okay that tells you that whenever you start from S you're going to Z first Z has two children which is Y and W and then is going down to X which is the last one here now we can look written down there so we have the times from 1 to 16 the highest one and then we're denoting the intervals and as you can see the interval for S is the widest its child Z has one smaller on both sides and Y and W are there and X is there so you can see they're properly nested and the intervals are denoted by the second part of the forest the also has a similar structure and what we can do is we can print the parentheses so whenever we are going to S we start printing an open parentheses and then immediately the name of the node then we hopping to Z we're printing an open parentheses the name of the node Z then we're hopping to the next child which is parentheses and then X and then if you can choose whether you want to print the node name again and then a closing parentheses or only closing parentheses doesn't matter still important is that the parentheses you never have you always close a parentheses before you open another one so this is the parenthesized expression that is attached to that graph here this is just a redrawing this is just a redrawing of that graph where it's drawn like a tree so whenever we have a tree the edges are going down whenever we have a backward edge the edge is going up whenever we have a forward edge the edge is going down and whenever we have a cross edge the edge is going across in any direction as you like so this is a way of drawing such graphs in tree form so that the tree is really a tree going downwards okay so this is depth first search and this is the interval theorem the other one is that it's written here the so called white path theorem white path theorem just says whenever we have a that's the same for depth first search and breadth first search so the paths are always going through white edges when they're discovered but this is by construction this is not so interesting in my eyes okay so let's get rid of the images again I have to change okay there okay so what we've seen is we've seen that in a depth first search we have four different kinds of edges we've discussed this already the first ones are the tree edges those are the ones that hop to white nodes whenever we discover them adjacency the ones that are going to gray nodes those are ones that are going back in our search because all the gray nodes are in the search path that led to us so when we are discovering a gray node we are going back through the search path so those are the back edges and then we have the forward edges and the cross edges those are the ones that are going from ourselves to black nodes if they're going from our connected component of the tree so from our tree part to another tree they're called cross edge if they're going within our tree they're forward edges because that means that we've already been there and so we've come back to where we were before and trying to reach it again so whenever we are reaching to a black edge we are going forward in the search again and the cross edges are between the trees in the depth first forest whenever we have an undirected graph so this is an important theorem whenever we have an undirected graph we never have forward edges so if that's the theorem 20.10 if gate g equal ve is an undirected graph graph every edge is either a tree edge or a back edge a Okay, so why is this the case? Well, so let's prove that. So the first thing is, why can't it be a cross-edge? Right? So let's try to figure first out why it can't be a cross-edge. Well, cross-edge means that it's going from one type, from one part of the depth-first search forest to the other part of the depth-first search forest, right? But that means that we would have to have a complete tree, another complete tree, and then we're going cross from one tree to the other. But since the graph is undirected, we would have had to traverse the tree first when we're looking through the left side of the tree. So going across trees is only possible if the graphs have arrows. If they don't have arrows, we would have seen the tree first because we are looking through connected components. So there cannot be any cross-edges. cross-edges. Because the respective edge would connect the two trees of the forest making them part of the same tree. because it's an undirected graph. So we cannot have any cross-edges. Okay, now the interesting question is why cannot have a forward edge? Well, the point is that whenever we have an arbitrary edge in the graph, whenever a UV is an edge, then what we do have is that either has to be true. Either then either U dot D is smaller than V dot D or the other way around. or V dot D is smaller than U dot D because we know that all the discovery times that we record are different from each other. Right? So the discovery times are all the numbers, the finish times and the discovery times, all are distinct from each other. So that's how it's produced. So either of these inequalities has to be held. So let's say without loss of generality, let U dot D be smaller than V dot D. So U shall be discovered before V. Now, that means we have two possibilities. If U is gray, then the search has to discover and finish V before we have finished U. That's by the parenthesis theorem. Right? So therefore, since V is adjacent to U, the interval, U dot D U dot F has to be, has to strictly contain V dot D and V dot F. Because we have to look at V first. V dot F is but that means that we have only two possibilities. V has to be undiscovered at the time when we find V. Right? And so that means that the edge has to go is a tree edge. That's one possibility. And the other possibility is yes? Oh, time. Oh, yeah. But that's the last thing that I want to say. So it's anyway the end. So yeah. So that basically already proves it that it's either going to a gray or to a white edge. And so have a nice afternoon. See you again tomorrow where we use the algorithms to actually do something properly. What's that? Oh, yeah. I know that. Okay. That's a good quote. Thank you.
