to the lecture course. Currently we are discussing heaps, sorry not heaps, we're discussing hash tables and yesterday we've actually introduced what it has what the hash table is and today we want to finish the proof that we started yesterday that basically if we have a hash table with load factor alpha that searches in the hash table take theta of one plus alpha time no matter whether they're successful or whether they're unsuccessful and the unsuccessful part we've already proved and we're in the midst of proving that a successful search also takes theta of one plus alpha time and just to remind you what we did yesterday we introduced our indicator variables ijq that basically say we search for xi so this is the indicator variable of search for xi then we have that h the hash of the ith key is q and that the a the hash of the jth key is also q and we've already calculated that the expected value of xijq is one over n times m squared so this is something we calculated yesterday and then we have a new random variable and the random variable is yj and that says that yj is prior this is the indicator variable of xij is prior is prior to the element we search for the variable how can we write our yj in our indicator variables xij q well this is clear so yj is a sum so what kind of sum do we have it's double sum actually so um all the keys we go through all the keys because it doesn't matter which key it is and we have keys from zero to m minus one and then what we also have is that any of the other elements is um being searched for so we also sum the sum from i equals one to j minus one of xij q well and again um the expected value of yj okay because of linearity of the expected value is therefore the sum k iq equals zero to m minus one of the sum i equals one to j minus one of the expected value of x i j and q okay so this is not so enormously difficult we can just plug in the expected value of x i j q which we've calculated up there so this is the sum q equals zero to m minus one um and i equals one to j minus one of one over n times m squared and you can see that this here does not depend on the index q and it also doesn't depend on the index i which means that we can just calculate the sum right so we calculate this m times which cancels one or one of the m's which is then the sum i equals one to j minus one of one over n times m because we have m copies of the same sum and then we have this also doesn't depend on i so we have so we have j minus one copies of n of one over n times m which is j minus one divided by n times m so the expected value of yj is x is actually that and now um the rest what we have to do is we have to calculate uh said so which is how many um elements appear in the list prior to the element uh to the element being searched for and this is of course all the others so the variable said is the one we're interested in is the indicator variable of the number no it's is is the is the number of elements being uh searched before our in before our element before the the interesting element and this is of course the sum of all of them so the set is the sum over all of the elements that we have and these are n so j equals one to n of y j and we are interested in the number of comparisons and the number of comparisons is one more so we want to calculate the expected value of z plus one so what is the expected value of z plus one well this is of course one plus the expected value of z and the expected value of z is a sum so we have a sum j equals one to n expected value of yj now we've already calculated what the expected value of yj is so this is one plus um the sum j equals one to n of j minus one divided by n times m now this is of course equal to one plus the sum of j equals zero to n minus one of j divided by n times m and n times n doesn't depend on j so this is basically the sum of all j um from zero to n minus one which is n minus one times n over two which is um the arithmetic sum which is n minus one times n over two nm and the n one of the n cancels so this is basically the rest so this is equal to one plus n minus one divided by two m and this is basically theta of one plus alpha and so we finished and this finishes the proof okay nice now um that is what we need to know about hashing with chaining one interesting question now is how do we properly construct hash functions um to get behavior we want and we've seen that all of this um discussion depends on that our hash functions have certain properties and they should be some sort of independent random hash functions right so the the idea was that whenever we get a new key um the uh hash function randomly chooses an element between zero and m minus one and then keeps a memory of that and um forever takes uh this uh uh assignment uh that the key is mapped to the uh random number it chose in the first time of course this is not doable because it would require a data structure that is as complicated as the one we want to build so this is not a real idea um but we want to get as close to that as possible and um the point is that um usually what is done in computer science is we ad hoc invent hash functions they should be good but usually there is a single hash function that is taken and most of the people somehow uh how should i say rely on the fact that uh the keys come in some random order right which is maybe true if you get numbers as keys that are sourced from somewhere but it's unlikely to be true if you use names for example because names tend not to be random strings uh and they might very much depend on the country but um in austria i think steiner um is very very frequent and maya and muller also very frequent while my name uh which is is very infrequent so you can see that names are not really um uh well they're not really random right um there are some piles that have more and some that have less and i think that's true in every country right so you can probably find um and i don't know um just from guessing your names um in in any of the in any of the countries uh east uh of us um it's likely very much the same so you will have in your country like a name that is much more frequent than any other names and if you're in china then i think wang and lee um really compete for um what is i think lee's the this is the most frequent family name in the world and um the most frequent first name in the world is muhammad and so you can somehow uh figure out that uh this is not random at all so you can get a lot of hashes um that end up at the same key just because the data is not um random and so um we have if you choose a single hash function this is called static hashing so choose one and then use it in your program for every time this is called a for every time this is called a static hashing and this is very very frequent what you can also do is you can do random hashing in some sense a random hashing means you take a family of hash functions and so like um when we randomize an array or when we randomize the data before we do some sorting or so um as we've done then you can also do randomized hashing but randomized hashing usually doesn't mean yet that you randomly permute your keys or change your keys um but what you usually do is you randomly um choose a hash function so that you can't have an adversary that actually gives you something that is always bad for your hash function so this is somebody there so you randomly choose hash function so we are in the chapter um that talks about hash functions this is 11.3 i think it's hash functions so what's important to know is that basically two classes of large classes of hash functions the ones that are used for organizing hash tables that's a big class but there is also a second big class of hash functions which are cryptographic hash functions um which are almost impossible to invert um what do i mean by that because they are not by objective maps anyway so what i mean by inverting um so maybe some of you have already downloaded software from the internet um and what you usually get in some sense is uh often a signature to software if it's free so you can download the software and then you can check on your computer whether um the software has some given signature right at least you should if you download software from the internet you should do two things all the time when there is a signature of the software you should get it and you should figure out whether the key that is used for doing the signature is actually valid um issued by the company or by the people who actually produce the software and then when you downloaded it and you downloaded the signature then you would compare them you would run the signature algorithm on the downloaded piece and then you would compare it with the signature that is provided on the web page or or wherever for download because um that helps you to make sure that the software you download is not tampered with has not a hidden virus or hidden backdoor that the authors didn't implement right somebody else some malicious other person um and why is this good because this also works by using a hash function and this is also one way so it's usually something like 128 bits or 256 bits written in some encoding like base64 encoding or something like that that lets you display an average and an arbitrary bit sequence by uh letters and numbers and some basic uh or just only letters and numbers but this is just an encoding a bijective encoding of an arbitrary bit string and and these functions these hash functions are designed in such a way that it is very very difficult to find another uh bits and another key that maps to the same the same signature right um because if you would want to trick um you by changing the software um the software is to the whole bit string of the software is taken run through the uh one-way hash function giving you this 128 or 256 bit or 256 bit key and 256 bit is a lot right so because that has two to the 256 possibilities which is so much you couldn't even write the number down if you could write on every um stable elementary particle in this universe a number if you could do that this wouldn't be enough to get the number written down so um therefore this is enormous and so um but of course arbitrary software sequences more than 128 or 256 bits right so many of the same software um bit strings map to the same key in principle right but um it is very very difficult to actually find another one that maps to the same the same despite being known that around and they cannot just try because trying to to the 256 um possible changes is just not doable on a computer right so this is the strength of this cryptographic hashes and they are made and they are custom made so that they really map to very different things and so sometimes cryptographic hash functions are used for hashing arbitrary length strings to get also in your in but they are slow usually they are slow compared to what you want to do with your hash table and therefore there's the second class of hash functions that are mainly used within computer programs to organize a data structure and we will talk about these mostly um although cryptographic hash functions are also mentioned in the um uh in the text uh and they are actually mentioned at the point where you want to do arbitrary length strings to hashes i would not do that because they're really slow compared to uh handcrafted or other hash functions yeah so usually most of the the software implementation use iterative um hash functions oh i will i will tell you about this a bit later okay so what does what does a good hash function do well a good hash function basically tells you that um the likelihood that some data that comes from your application uh produces a cash a hash collision is not bigger than basically one over n or two over m or something like that the size of the hash table so a very small constant multiple of one over m um so this is a good hash function and this whether a hash function is good or bad very much depends on what you have at hand or what data you have at hand right whether it's names whether it's numbers whether it's i have no idea what yeah measurements or uh or or other things uh usually uh what you what you what you hash for is ids right so um for example if you have a large data science project and this data science project um analyzes goods um for a company so you have a large company and uh you wanna do data analysis on their products um how much they're actually how much of them are actually um bought which of them are frequent um which of them have a good uh revenue which of them don't which of them belong to the 90 of the products that you actually uh sell regularly which of them are actually i don't know um um flagship products right they're probably not sold regularly but they are the um let's say the company um representative product you know what i mean like uh iphones uh nowadays right they are probably the company product of apple but they of course produce many more things like ipads mac computers uh even cpus but usually whenever call apple everybody nowadays thinks iphone right and even if the iphone might not produce the biggest revenue per product it does but it's just an example um uh then still they wouldn't dump it because it's their flagship product right and so many companies have flagship products they need to sell just because it's their company product and they want to might might make more revenue with other things right so it's very likely that apple makes more um percentage revenue per piece of selling you um new power courts or new um i have no idea what is something that's probably comparatively oversold um i um what's the phones the iphones uh i know that are not the iphones the what are they called the things you put into if yeah the earphones but they have a name the apple earphones have a name i have no idea what they're called earpods yeah exactly so um they're very likely they make much more money or the airtags or things like that right because i think an airtag problem production costs 10 cents and they sell it for what 30 euros such maybe it costs 20 cents if you include the battery right while producing an iphone probably costs really a few hundred euros right then they cannot sell it for 30,000 times of the production costs. Nobody would buy it. But nobody cares about air tags because they're nice and they're small, but likely production costs nothing. And so the percentage revenue of those products might be much higher. But these are things you will have to analyze if you're doing data analysis. That's some of the things you have to do. And then, of course, you read in lots and lots of databases and every product will have a unique article number. The same iPhone, what's the number now? 16? 17? 17? There are many, many iPhone 17s, right? They differ in color. They differ in production site. They differ in memory, of course. They differ in delivery path. They differ in many things. And all of them has a different article number, even if it's more or less the same product. And the article numbers are not only numbers. They're almost strings always, right? So when you read in the data, you have to store the data somewhere. And what you usually do is you're using hash tables. But these numbers are not completely different, right? An Apple employee can tell you on one glance, usually whether that's an Apple article number or not. So they're not random. And so if you choose the wrong hash function, then they will end up in the same slot at the end. Like, oh, we only take the first three digits and then we map with respect to the first three digits. But maybe it's only five first three digit things and all the rest of the information is in the final digits, right? And there are similar things in what is known. Numbers are not random. If you have any information that is encoded in numbers, be it tax returns, be it other things, right? It's well known that numbers containing smaller digits are more frequent than numbers containing higher digits. That's just a matter of how these things... And then if you assume that all the numbers that come are random, then you're already screwed because it's just not true. And so what is a good hash function very much depends on the application, okay? And I can only give you a few of the ideas that are written in the book. And one of them we've already done. So I've already told you that if you have random keys that are between zero and one, then one possibility is just to multiply it by M and round down, which gives you a possibility. And this is then also a very good key, a very good random number. So what else can be done? Well, if keys are numbers, what you can do, for example, is you can divide it or you can take modulo. So if k is a number between zero and N or between minus N, let's say between zero and N, then what you can always do is you can calculate k mod M. Well, this then gives you a number between zero and N minus one. And this usually works somewhat well. It doesn't if k, if N is just equal to M. Because then, well, it works well, but then all the M's will also end up in zero. And so there will be one, you see what I mean, it will be quite imbalanced because all of them mapping to zero will be on average double the number mapping to all the other ones. So if N and M have bad relation with respect to each other, then this is not a great hash function, but it depends on what you're doing. The other thing is, so this is the division method. Then there is another one that's called multiplication method. Multiplication. It's using something that we've done last time. And the idea is basically you round down, you take the key, you multiply the key by some constant A and then you take it modulo one. What does it mean? That means you just take only the part that is between zero and one. So A is a floating point number. So A is a floating point number. K might also be a floating point number. It doesn't matter. But you ignore the part that is whole. So basically what you're doing, you're subtracting from X, X round it down. So this is modulo one. This is X modulo one. Right. So this is just ignore everything that is an integer part. And then you're multiplied by M and round the rest down. And then choosing A properly is one possibility. Okay. So this is the multiplication method. And then if you want to really be fast, there is something which is called the multiply and shift method. Multiply and shift. And this is good if M is a power of two. And L is an integer, of course. Because what you can do then is you can multiply, you choose some number A. You multiply your key by A. Then you take that modulo two to something, like two to some W, where W basically is, well, how should I explain? I should probably explain it a bit better. So M has L bits, right? So M being 2L means that from zero to 2L minus one, you have exactly L bits that represent your key. And if you take a number A between zero and two to the W, and so A should be between zero and two to the W, if you multiply these things with each other, then you can do, and also K, and also K is between zero and two to the W minus one. That basically means that K fits also into a W sized bit, sized word, right? Then you can multiply, if you multiply A by K, the result will have at most two W bits. So A times K is then between zero and two to the W times two to the W minus one, which is two to the two W minus two to the W, right? Which means that A times K always fits into a word of size two to the W. So it has at most two to the W bits. If you calculate that modular two to the W, that basically means you take the lower end of that, and then what you can then do is you shift this right by W minus L bits. Because this will fit into a W sized word if you shift it to the right by W minus L bits. Shifting to the right means basically dividing by two to the W minus L and ignoring the fractional bits, right? So this is, so the nice thing about computers is if you multiply by a power of two, you can either, you can shift the bits to the left, just add enough zeros because that two is ten in binary. And if you shift to the right, you basically move the the fraction point right to the right. So you divide by two to the L, which is usually done on a CPU in one instruction. So very, very fast. And also doing modular something is doing is done very fast because it just have to set the bits that are above two to the W to zero. Right? So this just means masking something, which is usually done in one instruction. And this is shifting something, which is also done in one instruction within the register. So this is very fast. You have a multiplication, a mask and a shift, which is at most three instructions, which is, so this is a very fast possibility. There is an example computed in the book. I can actually, if you like, I can write it down. I won't calculate it. So if the key is one, two, three, four, five, six, and L is 14, which means that M is two to the 14, which is 16,384, which is a nice power of two. And W, let's say W is 32. So we have a 32-bit machine. Usually now it's 64, but the difference doesn't matter. And now A is something strange. I have to copy that. This is 265, why ever, 443, 5769, why ever, this is the case. And Donald Knuth actually invented that. Then we can compute this expression and I won't calculate all of the intermediate things. But the point is this ends up in H of K being 67. And this is in some sense. So what is this doing? It's multiplying these two numbers and then it's taking some L-sized part more or less from the middle to actually compute the hash. Right? It ignores the uppermost W bits and it ignores the lowermost W minus L bits. So it's taking the highest L bits from the lower half. So this is what this is doing. So it's multiplying K by A and from the result it's taking from the half of the result in bits it's taking the upper L bits as a hash. So this is one possibility and I think this was by Donald Knuth. Okay so now yep great so the next one is random hashing so that's probably that's something I've been talking about already. so all of these hash functions are nice however they're not perfect and so what is possible so you remember we always had this expected and this average runtime or the average behavior and the expected behavior and the difference between average behavior and expected behavior was always whether we have a deterministic algorithm and random data or whether we have a random algorithm and the same can be done with hashing so we can if you want to change our algorithm to a random algorithm by choosing randomly a hash function out of a family but of course once we've chosen the hash function we have to stick to it so we cannot choose the hash function every time we calculate the hash key that would make this stupid because we would get different hashes for the same keys every time we do it so random hashing means we have a large family of hash functions we choose one at the beginning of our we every time that we read in the data structure we could in principle choose a different hash function every time so the idea is we look at the family of hash functions that map to 0 to m minus 1 right so we want all of them to map to the same range and we say that a family is universal so we say that age is universal if it has the following properties whenever we have two distinct keys so whenever if for any any distinct keys k1 and k2 the number of hash functions h that produce a hash collision on k1 and k2 with h of k1 is the same as h of k2 is at most well what is expected the size of h of course has the feature in and the number of distinct slots that we have so if in other words if we randomly choose if we randomly choose an h in h the probability of any two keys having a collision is at most 1 or 1 so of course you can always get a family of uniform hash functions but just taking all the functions that map n elements to m elements right because this is a finite possibility that just means you take an n you take for every n and m there is easy to calculate because for every choice of n you have m possibilities which means that you have m to the n possible functions that map n elements to m elements so the family of all maps of all maps from n keys to m slots is universal but of course it has n to the n elements this is a lot so we don't want to do that and actually most of these hash functions cannot be written down properly so now if we have a universal hash function then so if we choose from so that's actually corollary right corollary 11.3 corollary 11.3 if we choose from a universal family of hash functions then the expected runtime well how how shall say this do I want to write no just forget it I don't think that this result is so nice and I don't want to prove it so let's do it let's get rid of that we want to construct useful hash functions and not spend a lot of time doing these things okay so the question is if we don't want to do that what can actually be achieved so what are achievable properties of random hashing okay so what is the first one is uniform uniformity so when is a family of hash functions uniform the idea is if if you have a family and if you take any key if for every key k the chance the chance the chance or the probability that's the probability that a randomly chosen h maps k to q in zero to m minus one has probability one over n is the probability is one over m then we call a family of hash functions uniform so the idea is we take an arbitrary key we take an arbitrary slot and then we choose a random hash function and the probability that this randomly chosen hash functions moves the key to the given slot is just one over m it's called universal this is something we already know but let's write it down again so the family is universal if for distinct keys if for keys k1 not equal to k2 the probability that h of k1 is equal to h of k2 is at most 1 over m so this is the second important property universal universal so there is a generalization of universality which is called epsilon universality so something is called epsilon universal if the same thing here if for any keys k1 not equal to k2 the probability that h of k1 is equal to h of k2 is at most epsilon yeah that means that a universal family is 1 over m universal so universality and 1 over m universality is the same and there is another one which is called d dependent d dependent means we take d different keys if we take d different keys d1 k1 to kd and any d slots and any d slots q1 to qd that are all in 0 to m minus 1 of course because there are slots the probability then the probability that h of ki is equal to qi for i equals 1 to d is 1 over m to the power of d so as we do it independently for all of them and so those are the most important properties that these hash function families can have and what we would like to do now at least is we want to construct a universal family of hash functions hash want to construct a universal family of hash functions okay so um four numbers so let's assume that the keys are numbers so let's assume that the keys are numbers okay so there are finitely many as always so there are finitely many keys and what we do first is we choose a prime number that is bigger than all of the keys so we choose p in the natural numbers prime to be bigger than all possible keys and that basically means um so you learned how to calculate um in the residual classes right so modulo and things like that and you also learned that the residual classes modular prime number are a field or didn't you so this is important to know um so if you take the residual classes classes mod p the set is called cp is a field so as a summary from the introductory course um it's associative with respect to addition and multiplication it's commutative with respect to addition and multiplication um there exists a neutral element zero um for addition there exists a neutral element one which is not equal to zero for multiplication and every element has an additive inverse so for every element there exists a minus a for every a there exists a minus a so this s a plus minus a is equal to zero and for every element which is not equal to zero is not equal to zero there exists a multiplicative inverse um so you can divide by all elements that are not equal to zero and the distributivity law holds um and i was quite how shall i say i i'm wondering when you learned about fields um in linear algebra there was not a single person in all of the exams that actually said that multiplicative inverses only exists for element that are not equal to zero so whenever the question was what is what is a field um everybody says that every element has have to have a multiplicative inverse but zero doesn't so just remember that for the for the future and also another important thing is that one must be different from zero so a field always has at least two elements okay anyway so residual classes module p said p is a field that means you can divide by elements in p as well um and there is another um notation that we will need which is said p star and this is set p without zero okay so that all the elements that are not zero okay now um the point is because p is bigger than the number of keys p will also be bigger than m so p will also be bigger than m this is also something we know so now what we can do now is we can choose an arbitrary element a in set p star so let a b in set p star and b being set p and our k since k is a number that is smaller than p k will also be in set p since k is smaller than p that means that k is also somewhere somehow in set p so you can regard k also as an element of set p and what you can do then you can define our hash function that depends on a and b and maps a key to what well first it multiplies k by a and adds p so it takes a times k plus b this then of course can be an element that is larger than p so the first thing you do is you calculate this mod p and then the result you calculate mod m to make it smaller than m get it between zero and m minus one so let's calculate an example example let p be 17 so quite small we want to have n6 and we calculate the hash function three four of eight so what do we need to calculate we need to calculate a times which is three times eight and we have to add b which is four then we calculate this modulo 17 and we calculate the result modulo six so three times eight is 24 plus four is 28 modulo 17 is 11 and 11 modulo six is five so this is five and so this is the hash function so what is then the family of hash functions the family h that depends of course on p and on m this is the set of all hash functions h a b for which a is in cp star zp star and b is in zp yeah well depending on p this is quite uh a few because you can choose them independently you have p different choices for b and you have p minus one different choices for a so the size of h pm is in principle p times p minus one And the theorem, and I will not prove it because we have to do other things as well. So theorem 11.4 is HPM, is universal. So this is a universal function, family of hash functions. If you want to hash arbitrarily long things, what is usually done is it's split into smaller parts. And these smaller parts are repeatedly multiplied by something and then taken modulo to something else. So this is a possibility. You can, for example, take a prime number, take the first segment multiplied by the prime number, take it modulo to a power of two. Then take the next segment multiplied by a prime number, add it, take it modulo to a power of two. Next segment multiplied by prime number or multiply the rest by the prime number and add it and things like that. So this is usually done in computer programs. For example, if you look at Java, the pre-implemented hash functions, I don't know the ones in Python. I just know the ones in Java. They use this all the time. So you have many objects if you have if you want to calculate the hash of an object that depends that contains many other objects. It just chooses a different prime number for every of the sub objects, calculates the hash of the sub object and multiplies everything by the respective prime number, puts it together and takes it modulo at power of two. And then it passes it up. So it calculates hashes recursively and they are well enough for storing stuff in hash tables. So this is usually done and this is usually fast. So there is cryptographic hashing. I've been talking about that. But now let's go to the other possibility of organizing hash tables. So the first thing we discussed about was hashing with chaining. Right. So we have a table of lists and whenever we have a new element and we put the element in the list where we calculated the index with the hash function. So the hash function tells us into which list we actually put our element. This is hashing with chaining. The other, the second possibility 11.4 is open addressing. Open addressing. An open addressing says we have a fixed size hash table. It cannot get bigger. So the point with hashing with chaining is the hash table can grow and grow and grow until it takes all of your elements. If you have any elements and the hash table size is M, when M is bigger than M, it still can contain all of these elements. Open addressing works differently. You have a fixed size hash table and you will never ever store more elements into the table than the ones where you pre allocated your hash table. So you want to fill all the spots in that hash table by your elements. But then of course you have a problem with hash collisions. hash collisions. If two of them would land at the same place, you wouldn't want to overwrite the one you've already put in there. But then if the element is already occupied, every key does not only have a primary position you want to put it, but also a secondary, a tertiary, a quaternary. So it has many possible positions to go and it checks first its first position. If this is occupied, it goes to its second position and checks whether this is occupied as well. If it is not occupied, it's stored in the second position. If it's occupied, it goes to its third position and so on until the whole hash table is filled. Right. So the load factor of an open address hash table can never be larger than one because once it's full, it's full. So if the table is full and you want to store another element, then you just have to say, sorry, my hash table is full. Right. OK, so how does it work and what is the most frequent? How does what is the most frequent hash table? And it's called double hashing. And this is, for example, I hope still, but three years ago it was still used by the GNU C compiler or C++ compiler to store identifiers. So, yes, because double hashing is usually quite fast and you have a fixed size hash table. And you will see in a second that the average case runtime is very well, is very good. So what how does double hashing work? Double hashing, as it's called double hashing, chooses two hash functions. OK, so we have two auxiliary hash functions. We have two auxiliary hash functions. H1 and H2. Both of them map your keys to a number. So both of them map your keys to some number. So what you usually do is to take the key of the first hash function. You take the hash of the sorry, you take the hash of the first hash function of your key. This is your primary position where you want to put your element. But then if it's occupied, you have additional tries and you calculate the number of tries you have. So let I be the Ith try. Then you multiply with the second hash function. Right. So H1K plus H2K is the second possible choice. H1 of K plus two times H2 of K is the third possible choice. And of course, all of this is done modulo M at the end. So you wrap around if you overshoot them. This is then the hash function KI. And open addressing always uses hash functions that map the key space times the natural numbers. And of course, you can choose at most M minus one times because then you've laid latest. Then you have taken all possible positions. And this should map to zero to M minus one. So this is most so every open addressing can choose such a hash function. But the by far most often use case is this one where you choose two functions and just iterate through them like that. There is a special one where H2 of K is just K. It's just one. Sorry. So a very special case of double hashing is H2 of K being one, which of course is a very bad hash function in itself. This is called linear hashing. Or linear probing actually. Yeah, this leads to linear probing. So what does linear probing do? It just takes the value or your hash and then tries the next and the next and the next and the next until you find a free spot. So what does linear probing do? It does not mean to be a free spot. It does not mean to be a free spot. It does not mean to be a free spot. It does not mean to be a free spot. Usually, double hashing is very effective if you want to store data and never want to delete it. So if you want to store something and search for something, this is great. But deleting something is not very good. Why? Because let's look at how the basic algorithms work. So wait, let me let me give you a tip. Oh, come on. Just a second. It doesn't want to come up. I have to open it. To display the algorithm. No, come on. Okay, there we are. Okay, now. Okay, great. Let's change the projector. Let's get back. Let's take this one and let's move the… Finally. It's always the same. It doesn't go on. Okay, so let's turn off the lights of the blackboard. So how does it work? Well, these are the two most important algorithms for putting something into an open address hash table. The first one is quite simple, right? So you start… You want to insert a key into a hash table. So you start with trial zero. And what you're doing is you're getting the key, the ith key. So the ith position from your hash function. And then you check whether the key element is empty. And if the key element is empty, you just store your element there and return where you stored it. And otherwise you increase by one. And you do this until you have done M minus one tries. If you're at try M, then you know that the hash table is full and you return that the hash table is overflown. Actually, there is the possibility and this is something I have to tell you if you're not careful. What could happen in principle is that if M is not a prime number, what could happen is that you have other hash collisions. So that you produce the same number twice and then you have the hash collision even earlier when the table is not full. So just imagine that you have a table that is size 10 and H2 of case 2. Then you would try maybe an H1 of case 1. Then you would try 1, 3, 5, 7, 9. And then again 1 and you would never try 2, 4 and so. So you have to make sure that these are somehow relatively prime to each other so you can everything. If you don't, then you can have hash collisions earlier. So this is an important thing. So anyway, if you've done it M times, then you know that you have a problem. Okay, how do you search for it? Well, that's the same thing. You start with trial 0 and access the element that is at the index H of ki. And then you just check whether this element has index k. And if it has index k, you return the position. If it doesn't have index k, then you have to try the next position. Then you have to try the next position and so on until you probably, until you hit a nil, an empty element. Because if you hit an empty element, you know that it would have been there, right? If it were inside the table. So if it is an empty element, then you can stop and you also only have to do it at most M times. So either if you find an empty place or you've done it at times, you can stop and return that you didn't find it. So this is insert and search. But if you now think carefully about it. Now, what happens if you want to delete an element from the hash table? This is not an issue when you do hashing with chaining. Then you can easily delete something again from the list. But here, just imagine that you've found four keys that mapped to the same element. The first one is stored in position one. The second one is stored in position two. The third one is stored in position three. And the fourth one is stored in position four. Now, just imagine that you want to remove the second one. Then you would find it and put the nil there. But if you put the nil there, nobody will ever find the third one. Because you hit the nil in searching first. And then you know that it's empty and then you know nothing's come. And then the search procedure would stop. So what you would have to do is you would have to have an additional element in the hash table that tells you, well, this entry is not empty. It is empty, but it's not empty because we were never there. But it's empty because we deleted something. And then you would have to insert the deleted marker into that position. But that will spoil everything. Because then it could happen that you insert one, two, three, four. And then you delete one, two, and three. And then searching for four means you still have to do all the hops. If you want to avoid that, what you would have to do is if you delete that element, you would have to copy the other elements there. Well, this is a possibility. What you can do is you can, if you want to remove that element, you can go through the whole list and remember the last element that was not empty and put it into the free place. But that involves one copy operation for every delete. But this is a possibility. And for every delete, you would have to search to the end of the already occupied elements. So if you want to implement a hash table, an open address hash table with delete, you have to be very careful. That's the only thing I want to tell you. The best thing is not the one in the book, sorry. The best thing is if you want to delete an element, you always run to the end of your list and take the last element and copy it to the place you want to delete and set the last element to nil. This is not super fast, but if you want to occasionally delete at least all the other operations afterwards work well. This algorithm, I think, is not in the book. This is important to know. Okay. But open address hash tables work best if you've never want to delete anything. So now we can calculate double hashing. Oops, I want to actually remove this. I want to move back to my presentation. Yes. So, how does open addressing fair if we want to do the important operations which are insert and search? And this is theorem 11.6. 11.6. If we have an open address hash table, so if alpha is the load factor, factor of an open address hash table, tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue inserted. So we again assume that if we take all the data and we have an independent uniform permutation, so every permutation is one over n factorial in probability, and we don't actually do anything, then the number of probes that we have to do for an unsuccessful search or an element, so the number then the number of probes of probes on average for an unsuccessful search is order of one over one minus alpha. And the same is true for insertion, which is corollary 11.7. So also for insertion, the average number of probes is on the order of one divided by one minus alpha. So we have to find the first three spot because then the previous one has to be copied there. So this is the way to delete properly and the copy operation is only one swap, basically one swap of addresses and adding a nil, which is order of one. So therefore, this deletion operation is possible in that way. So the question is now what is the average number of operations you have to do for a successful search? So what you have to see? And what you have to see? And this is important. And maybe this is the most important thing about these results. They don't depend on n. Right? And so no matter how big your hash table is, it's always on the order of one over one minus the load factor of the table. So if you make sure that the load of your table doesn't get too big, then the average number of searches or something is not too large. And actually for successful searches, which is currently with theorem 11.8, the average number of probes for a successful search, or a successful search is on the order of is or is it most is on the order. No, actually it's a real bound. No, actually it's a real bound. It's at most one over alpha times the logarithm of one over one minus alpha. So if you have a table that is 90% full, then you take an average of 10 probes to put an element in there. And you have an average number of 10 probes to figure out that it's empty. So if you have a 50% full, then the average number is 2. So if your hash table is half full, then you have to probe on average two steps to figure out that you're unsuccessful. So if you have a 90% full hash table, the average number of probes is about two and a half. So it's which is less than three. So open address hash tables are very good in searching for data. So they are very fast if you want to search for data. They are okay if you want to insert data, right? Unless it's very, very full and inserting takes progressively longer and longer. But searching for it, because this is a logarithm here, searching for it is really fast. And that's why, for example, in many compilers and things like that, that have to look up, identify as very often, usually double hashing is used because searching is so fast. Inserting is less frequent. So for example, if you have a data analysis job and you need to read in the data, but then perform a lot of search operations on the data, then double hashing is a very good idea. Because that helps you to find the data very fast, even if inserting becomes slower and slower. But the only thing you have to do, take your hash table large enough, right? So if you take your, if you know you have to read in, I don't know, a hundred thousand data points, then just pre-allocate an area that is maybe 200,000 in size or 150,000 in size, so that your load factor never gets above 75% or so. And then all of the things are fast. Inserting is fast. Deleting is fast. Because I told you how to properly delete an open address table and searching is very fast. Okay. So this is important to know. Now it's 11.15. And that's why I skipped all of the proofs. Because next week we're going to start with search trees. Binary search trees. That will be the next thing we will talk about. So have a nice afternoon. See you again next week. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye.
