Okay, so hi and welcome back to the lecture course. I'm just checking what the problem is because nowadays for some reason they've changed the camera so that nobody can see me. Okay, that's better now. I just changed the camera position. What's okay again. Okay, so I'm sorry, having a few technical problems. Now it's better. Okay, so welcome back to the lecture course. Today we are continuing with our quest for understanding graph algorithms. Yesterday we've discussed the two basic graph algorithmic methods which is depth first search and breadth first search and today we're gonna look at some... Oh yeah, that's likely better. Okay, great. And today we're gonna look at some applications of those methods. Just a second. I still need to fix some technical things. Okay. Yeah, there we are. Okay. Almost. Okay. So yesterday we talked about, as I said, breadth first search, depth first search. And there's one very important algorithm that we already needed in the lecture. Well, not only in the lecture course. Okay. Okay. That means that I also need to clean the blackboard. That we are needed in the exercises class, at least for one problem, which is topological sort. And this will be the first algorithm we're discussing today. So if you remember the definitions of the graphs we've been discussing, we had directed and undirected graphs. And we discussed what a tree is, what a cycle in a graph is, what a path in a graph is. And we discussed what a cyclic graph is. And a directed acyclic graph, I think I also called it a DAG, right? So as far as I remember, I did that a few days ago. So, directed acyclic graphs are frequent in applications, also in data science applications. They usually represent structured data like priorities or jobs where you have precedences over others. So, for example, if you want to do a schedule of operations, you can code this into a graph where each activity is a node in the graph and each directed edge is a precedence requirement. So, for example, one of the examples is in the book. If you want to dress up, right? You have several activities, which of your clothing pieces you can actually put on. And it's very likely that you will put on your socks before your shoes and not the other way around. So, there is a clear precedence to make sure that you do it in the correct order. But it doesn't matter whether you put on your socks first or you put on your shirt first. So, there is no clear precedence for those. But likely at the end, if you want to wear a coat, it's very unlikely that you will put on your coat before your socks. It's at least unusual. There might be some situations, but it's usually quite unusual to do that. What you definitely don't want to do is you don't want to put on your shirt after you put on your coat. So, you usually have a precedence operation and this can be encoded, for example, by using a node for each activity and then an arrow for each precedence. So, where the source of the arrow is the activity that has to happen first before the other activity happens. And then you get some sort of directed acyclic graph, right? Because you can't, if you want to wear something, usually you can't have both of the precedence of the other. So, because you will never be able to start wearing anything. And so, let's look at some directed acyclic graphs. So, you have, those are things that you can usually draw like this. So, you have two possibilities. Maybe in the beginning, you can start wearing your underpants first and then have the decision whether it starts from the bottom or starts from the top dressing, right? And then there will be some things that have precedences and others will not have any. Might look like this and then you might have another route even, which might be precedence of this. And then maybe if you wear a watch, usually you can put the watch on whenever you like, right? In the beginning or in the end when you're leaving, there is a mouse. Don't be afraid, it's not gonna bite. Don't be afraid, it's not gonna bite. Don't be afraid, it's not gonna bite. Okay, so apparently it went, apparently it went where it came from. And it obviously was more afraid of us and we needed to be of it. Okay. So, yeah, let's continue. So, what usually if you're out there in winter, maybe have a very, very thick coat or other stuff, or if you go skiing, then you probably put on your watch before you put on your skis. That would be usually a good idea. But maybe things look like this, right? So those are the shoes and this is the coat. And this might be a directed acyclic graph. You see there are no cycles in there. And at the end, you have to decide about the sequence where you put on your things, right? It's rarely advisable to do two things at the same time. So usually, only if you're in really, really big hurry, you put on your shoes and your coat at the same time. And it most of the time fails, well, depending on your shoes. If you have slip-ins, then it might work. But if you have to fasten it using shoelaces, then the coat might be in the way while you are. It's probably not a good idea. Okay. So you need a sequence for these notes. And in order to get a valid sequence where you put on the things first that need to come first and put on the things last that need to come last, you perform a topological sort of that graph. Basically meaning you put a total order on all of the notes such that the note that comes after is later in the sort and the algorithm for topological sort is really, really simple. I can display it on the blackboard on the Beamer, which is that. So the first thing is you do a depth first search on the graph that computes you the detection and finishing values, the D and DF values for every note. So you do a depth first search on the list. And after you've finished every note, you put them into a linked list or into any list starting from the front. So you always put it on the front. And then you put in a linked list of the vertices. So let's look whether this works. So how would it work on this nice graph? Well, you're doing a depth first search, meaning you start from here, which means the beginning. I will write on the left side again, the discovery time and on the right side, the finishing time. So here is the discovery time one. And then we're going to the to the child, which will have discovery time two. And then we're traversing to the next child, which is this one, which will have discovery time three. Now, this doesn't have any children, so it's finished at the same time. So it has finished time four. And since it has finished, we put it to the front of the linked list. And I probably have to number the notes somehow. So let's call this note A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J. Right. So let's call them like this. So the first thing we do is we put an A onto the beginning of a linked list. And then we are going back to the parent, which was two, but it's not yet finished because it still has children, which means the next child is E. So it's discovery time is five. And then we try to go to the children of E, but E's children are already all finished. So that's already black. So we finish E and give it a finishing time of six. And since it's finished, we put it to the front of our linked list. And then we're moving back to two. But two has another child, which is D. So its discovery time is seven. And we're trying to go here, but this node is already black. So we're going to the next child, which is C. So this has a discovery time of eight. And C is also not yet finished. So we're going to B. So B has a discovery time of nine and doesn't have any children. So it has a finished time of 10. And we put B onto the list. Then we're hopping back to C. It was C's only child. So we're finishing C with a discovery time of 11 and put C to the front of the list. And then we're traversing back to D because we came from D. So D gets a finished time of 12. And we put it in front of the linked list. And then we're hopping back to F. I mean, F has finished now all of its children. So it has a finished time of 13. And we put it in front of the linked list. Now we're hopping back to one. One does still have children. So we need to go down to G. G having a discovery time of 14 now. And it has children. So we're going down to C. But C is black. So we don't have to go down. So G is finished. Giving it a finishing time of 15. And we put it in front of the list. And then we're hopping back to one. Ah, no. Yeah. Then we're hopping back to one. And one has a finishing time of 16. And so we put the J in front of the linked list. And then we're starting with the next, breadth first search with the next white node. The next white node is H. So H has a discovery time of 17. And we're going down. But all of its children are already black. So we are already finishing it. And we put H in front of it. Then we're going to the next node. The next node is I. So I has a discovery time of 19. Since it has no children. Also of 20. And we're putting I in front of that. And so let's see whether this works. Well, we put on I first. Which is likely what? Which is probably a good idea. Then we put on H. I have no idea what this is. Maybe necklace or whatever. Then we're putting on the underpants. Which is J. Then we're putting on G. Which is good. Because J is already done. Then we're putting on F. Which is also good. Because it's already done. Then we're putting on D. Then we're putting on C. Then we're putting on B. So we're already standing around with our shoes. But it doesn't matter. We can put on our shirt now. And then we put on our coat. And we're finished. Right? So this is basically how topological sort works. Okay. I think demonstrating the algorithm is better. And it's clear how it works. Oh, that's an example with real number, with real words. Okay. Great. So, this is about topological sort. Which is an important algorithm. The next one is about discovering strongly connected components of a graph. So what is a strongly connected component? We've already discussed, so what is a strongly connected component? So let gamma V be a graph, or G in the book they're always called G, be a graph. And C, a subset of V. So C is called, then C is called a strongly connected component of V. And C is called, if for U and V in C, we have U, V and V, U. And this sign means there exists a path from U to V. So in a, furthermore, for all, V that are in V without C, and all U in C, either you or... And if you cancel it, that means there is no path. And if you cancel it, that means there is no path. So in some sense, these Cs are maximal. So you cannot add more vertices. So a strongly connected component is a subset of the graph where each node is reachable from each other node in both directions. Right? That's why it's called strongly connected component. If the graph is undirected, then this is always the case. Right? And so if this is doable, then this is also doable in an undirected graph. But in a directed graph, that's not the case. So here, this is not the case in both directions because it's an acyclic graph. You cannot go back at all. So these are the strongly connected components. And for some applications, you have to know your connected components. For example, if you want to display data and you want to display connections between people, networks or so, what is usually knowledge in a network is unidirectional. Right? Best example is you probably know who Brad Pitt is, but probably he doesn't know who you is. So knowledge is likely a unidirectional, a unidirectional relation. Right? So if you if you talk about data or relationships or networks in a graph, then usually networks are not undirected graphs. They're usually directed graphs unless they're friendship networks. Right? So usually friendship is a mutual thing. Of course, there are some strange people who think the other way around, but but at least mostly friendship is a mutual thing. So if A is a friend with B, then B is also a friend with A. So that means that friendship graphs tend to be undirected. And if you want to display wider networks, then the connected components of such graphs are interesting. Right? So what we can do is we can try to compute this. And interestingly enough, this is quite simple. And in order, well, that the algorithm works is not so simple, but that how the algorithm looks like is very simple. And in order to understand how this works is we need to define another notion. So if G equals VE is a directed graph. The transposed graph G transposed has the same vertices, but the transposed H set and the H set ET is just defined as VU for which UV is a So that basically means what you do is just you flip the E. So whenever the left graph has an arrow from A to B, the transposed graph will have an arrow from B to A. So you just flip all the arrows in the graph. That's anything. That's called the transposed graph. Okay? So this is something you need to know. Now we look at the algorithm for the strongly connected components. And this is really simple. I'm going to display it again, which means I have to pull this down. And I have to do it like this, right? Okay. Great. So that's strongly connected component uses two depth first searches. So first, does a depth first search on the graph, right? This computes, again as before, discovery times and finishing times for every node. So what you then do is you're using a sort algorithm for sorting all the vertices of the original graph by decreasing finishing times. So just resort the vertices by decreasing finishing times. And then you call a depth first search again on the transposed graph. And if you remember what we did here, we had our nodes from which we started. And we had ordered them this node before this node before this node, right? So we've ordered. So in the depth first search algorithm, there is the outer loop and then there's the recursive procedure, right? So in the outer loop, we're going through all the white nodes, which means that we're going through all the nodes that had not yet been visited before. And for the depth first search of the transposed graph, we are going through the nodes that we've visited through all the white nodes in just the descending, finishing times from the previous depth first search. And at the end, we are putting out the vertices of each tree in the depth first forest. So you remember we're producing this depth first forest that's called, that's keeping the parents of the discovery intact. So we have this and we just put out the vertices of each tree in the depth first forest. Right? As separate strongly connected components, every thing. So you call two depth first searches, the first one on the first graph. Then you call a sorting operation on all the vertices, sorting them by the finishing times. Then you call a second depth first search on the transposed graph using these finishing times. And once you've finished, you keep the depth first search tree and put this out as an output. And we can look at what it does for... Where are we? Just going the wrong... Going the wrong direction. So just a second. So there we are. Okay. So we're starting with the graph on the left. Right? So when we're starting with the graph on the left, then what you can see here is basically the strongly connected components. Right? On the upper left side, the A, B, E, you can see the circle, right? And since there is a circle, every node is reachable from every node. And on the left between F and G, you can also see a circle. And H is a circle by itself. Otherwise, there's nothing else. And C, D is also a circle. So those are the strongly connected components. They're encased in blue. And so what does the algorithm do? Well, the algorithm starts with the strongly connected... With the search for the... For the discovery times, right? And then the right hand side, when you look closely, is the transpose graph. Because every edge over there points in the other direction. Right? If you compare the two graphs on top, you can see that the right graph is the transpose of the left one. Right? Okay. Now we start with the left one. And if we start with the left one, we, for example, start with C. Right? With node C. That's how this one started. The depth first, the depth first is going to G first. Then it's going to F. F is finishing. Then it's going back to G. G has a pointer to H. So it goes to H. H is finishing. It's going back to G. Because that's why G has seven. Then it's going up to C again. C has another child, which is D. Which is finishing because H is already done. Eight, nine. Then it's going back to C. And then C is done. And then we have to hop to the next node, which is B. The next node is B is 11. 11 is going to E. It's going to A. Then back to B. And then the whole graph is finished. And that's why we have this starting time and finishing times. Right? So we've started with C. And then we started with B. And then we've discovered all the nodes. Now we are sorting all of these nodes by the finishing times. So descending finishing times means the largest finishing time has B. Right? So we start with the depth first search with B on the transpose graph. Okay? So the transpose graph tells us the first hop that we have to take is A. Because that's actually the only child of B in the transpose graph. So we're going to A. And then the only child of A in the transpose graph is E. And then we have a back pointer node from E. And that's it. So these two nodes, the blue nodes, dark blue nodes, are the tree nodes. Are the tree edges. Not the nodes. The edges. Sorry. And that's it. Then the B is done. Then we have to take the next highest node that is not yet done. So 16, 15, and 14 have been done. Which means that the next ending time is C again. C has ending time 10. So we start with C at the next time. Well, C has this child B, which is already done. So the next child is D, which is giving us the blue edge. D has to go back to C. So this is done. So that's the next one. So then we have to look for the next highest discovery time, which is not yet done. And this is ending time, which is not yet done, which is 7, which is G. So we start with the next thing in G. So G is hopping to F. And then it's finished. The next, this finishing time is H, which is H, which is the last one. So then we take the roots of all of these trees. The root of the first tree was B. Right? So, and all the nodes that are reachable are A and E. So the first connected, strongly connected component consists of A, B, and E. The next one is C and D. The next one is G and F. And the last one is H. So that's how we, how the algorithm works. Okay? So you might wonder why does it work? Why is this working at all? Because it seems so simple, right? You have to do, and you have to flip the edges and then you do it again. And afterwards, you apparently have the result. Okay. So let's think of, let's figure out why it actually works. So, the first thing that we need to understand or that we can see is lemma 20.13. If we have two strongly connected components, so 20.13. If C and C prime are strongly connected components of G. Then, and U and V in C. And U prime and V prime and C prime. And there exists a path that connects U and U prime. And then there does not exist. And there exists a path from V prime to V. And there exists a path from V prime to V. Well, this is trivial in principle. Why can't this be? Because by the definition of a strongly connected component. Since C is a strongly connected component, every node in C or every vertex in C is reachable from every other vertex in C. Right? So let's prove this, assume contradiction. Assume that there exists a path from V prime to V. If there exists a path from V prime to V. What we do know is, well, there exists, there does exist, exist a path from V to U. Why? Because U and V are in the same strongly connected component. And there also exists a path. And the path from U prime to V prime. Right? Because U prime and V prime are also in the same strongly connected component. But then, we have V is going to U. Is going to U prime. Is going to V prime. So, V is going to V prime. And this is a contradiction. Because, by the definition of a strongly connected component. Because V prime is in C prime. Meaning that this property fails. So, we can't have a path. Either we don't have a path from V prime to V. Or we don't have a path from V to V prime. But we've just proved that both paths exist. Meaning that V prime would also have to be in the strongly connected component C. And then C and C prime wouldn't be distinct. So, we don't have two different strongly connected components. So, this is a contradiction. And we've finished. So, that's important to understand. So, whenever we have a path from one node to the other. From one. When we have a path from one connected component to the other. We cannot have a path that goes back. Otherwise, they would be the same connected components. Now. What we can define. Is the finishing time. Of a subset of the graph. Okay. So, let. DFS. Assign. V dot F. For all. V. In the vertex set. Okay. And. And let. C. Be a subset of V. Then. And let. C. Be a subset of V. Then. And let. C. Be a subset of V. Then. We define. F. Of C. To be the maximum. Overall. V. In C. Of V. Of V. Of V. Of V. Of V. Of V. Of V. Of V. So, we're just taking. The maximal. Finishing time. Among all the vertices. That are in the subset. So, that assigns a finishing time. To a whole subset. That basically means. When the subset ends. To be discovered. So, every element in the subset. Has been worked on. Now. The next lemma. Which is 2014. Says the following. If C and C prime. Are distinct. As distinct. As distinct. As distinct. As. As distinct. As. As distinct. As. As distinct. As. As distinct. As. As distinct. As. As distinct. As. As distinct. As. As. As. As. As. As. As. As. As. As. As. As. As. Then, F and U in C and V in C prime. So we have vertices in, no, U in C prime, sorry. Just to make sure that it's the same as in the book. So U in C prime and V in C and U, V, an edge of the graph. So we have an edge from U to V and U is in C prime and V is in C. Then the finishing time of C prime has to be bigger than the finishing time of C. Okay, so let's prove that. And there are actually two different cases. The first case is that we can do the same actually for the starting times, for the discovery times, right? So what we also can define is that D of C is the minimum overall vertices in C of V dot D. So the discovery of a subset is when the first vertex is discovered. And the finishing time of a subset is when the last vertex is finished. And so we have two different cases. The first case is that D of C is bigger than D of C prime. And the other case is that D of C prime is bigger because all of them are different. And what is also important, that's just one thing which I want to mention, which we will need in the proof, but this is very obvious. So the strongly connected component of a graph and the strongly connected component of its transpose are the same. Right? Just by definition. Because that means that both have to be reachable in any direction. And this means that any of these paths does not exist. So that stays the same if you flip all the edges. Because if you can go in both directions. So the strongly connected components of G and G transposed are the same. So this is important. Okay. So let's have this. So in the proof, we have two possibilities. The first possibility is, case one, is that D of C prime is smaller than D of C. So we first discover C prime and then we discover C. So what is the first vertex? So when X, D is the first. So if X in C prime is the first vertex to be discovered. That means that D of C prime is the same as X dot D. Right? So this is actually the first node that we figure, that we find out. So if this is the first node, then all the other nodes in C and C prime have not yet been discovered. And being not discovered means that you're still white. So that means that all the nodes in C and C prime, except for X, are white at that time. Right? So let's get some space on the blackboard. That's a quick quote. Thank you. So that means at time t, at time d, all vertices in c union c prime without x are white. Right? So this is important. But that also means that uv is in e. Right? So uv is in e. And u crosses from c prime to c. But that means every vertex in c prime is reachable from x. Every vertex in c is reachable from every other vertex in c. Notably from v. So every vertex in c is reachable from v. And u is reachable from x. So that means we have a path from x to u, from u to v, and from v to any other v prime in c. Right? So every node in c is reachable from x. Right? So every node or vertex in c is reachable from x. And at that time the path only consists of white vertices. Because all the vertices are white. Every vertex is reachable from x and via white vertices only. But we've already discussed that that means that all the nodes in c and c prime will be descendants of x in the depth first tree. So that means that all the nodes in c and c prime will be descendants of x in the depth first search tree. So that means that x is greater than x. u dot f for all u in c union c prime without x. And that means that x f of c prime is equal to x dot f. And this means that this is strictly bigger than f of c. Because all the other elements are in c are in there. And so for every vertex in c, its finishing time will be strictly smaller than the finishing time of x. And so x dot f will be bigger than f of c. So that finishes the first case, right? So the next case is what happens if c prime is discovered later. So case 2 is d of c prime is actually bigger than d of c. Okay, again, we can look at the first vertex discovered in c. So let y be in c. So that d of c is equal to y dot d. So this is the first vertex that is discovered. But that means that all the other vertices in c are reachable from y. So all other vertices, so let u be also in c. That means that there exists a path from y to u. And at the time of discovery of y, every other vertex will be white in c. So I'm only using white vertices. But this means that f of c is y dot f. That just means that y is finishing last. Because all the other nodes are descendants. That's the same argument that we've used here. So that means that y dot f is actually the finishing time of c. But that also means that whenever we have a different vertex, but this means that f of c prime is bigger than y dot f. Actually, what we do know now, actually, yeah, I would have to explain that. Well, we know that d of c prime has to be bigger than y dot d. Well, this is clear because this is something we assumed in the beginning. But what we also know is that all, that means that all vertices in c prime are white at time d, at time y dot d. And they have to stay white until y has finished. Why? Because if they wouldn't stay white until y was finished, then they would be a descendant of y. But if they are a descendant of y, they would be reachable from y, which cannot be true. Because we've just seen that it's not the case. So lemma 2013 means that, lemma 2013 implies that no node in c prime is reachable from y. So none of them are their descendants. But this means that w dot f is bigger than y dot f for all w in c prime. And this again means that f of c prime, which is the maximum of all of those, is bigger than y dot f, which is f of c. And we're finished. And so we've seen that f of c prime has to be bigger than f of c. And now comes the important corollary, which is 2015. So corollary 20 dot 15. And it says the following. Now we can again, so let's c and c prime be two distinct, strongly connected components. Components of g equals v. and suppose that f of c is bigger than f of c prime. And then f of c prime. then e transpose does not contain an edge uv with u in c prime and v in c. Okay. Oh shit, I forgot to switch the blackboard. Well, I'm switching it back at least. Well, I have to move this down for a second so that at least everybody who is looking there can see all the stuff I wrote. Okay. This camera handling is somehow annoying. Okay. So that's what we're discussing, right? So now we have to prove the corollary. Now, well, if we look at lemma 2014 and look at the contrapositive of lemma 2014, 2014 says that if f of c prime is smaller than f of c, implies that there is no edge that does not exist in edge uv in e such, ah, sorry, this is v u. Sorry, I switched these two. There actually doesn't exist in edge uv in e with u in c prime and v in c. And so this implies that this is done because if there doesn't exist in edge uv in e, then there doesn't exist in edge v u in e transpose. Okay, now we need to prove the final thing, which is the theorem, theorem 2016. And the theorem says the algorithm works. So, so the strongly connected component algorithm. Strongly connected component algorithm works. proof. So it does compute indeed the strongly connected components. And the idea is that we do induction on the number of depth first trees found in the depth first search of g prime. So induction on the number of depth first search trees in the depth first search forest of g transposed. So the idea is that the hypothesis, the induction hypothesis is hypothesis is that the first k depth first search trees are all strongly connected components. and we want to show that k plus first one is also strongly connected component. Well, the point is if we haven't discovered anything yet, then trivially we have strongly connected components. So for k equals zero, this is trivial because the condition is void. We haven't discovered anything yet, so never mind. So what we want to look at is the k plus first tree. So we look at the k plus first tree that we discover. And we want to show that this is strongly connected component if all the others before were strongly connected components. And what we do know is that we're choosing roots in order of descending f of c's. So what we do know is that the first node, i.e. the root of the new tree is let the first node be called u. okay. So we start with a new node and then what we have is that so that since we've chosen it that way we know that there exists exists a strongly connected component c that contains u. Right? And what we also know by how we chose the elements that f of c is the same as u.f by how we chose because we sorted it by descending finishing time. And let c prime be any strongly connected component already discovered not yet discovered. discovered. That's it. Not yet discovered. If we have any other strongly connected component that is not yet discovered then f of c will be bigger than f of c prime. Right? Because we chose to go through the components in descending sequence. c OK. But that means that whenever we are at the time of the surge all the vertices of c are white. So that means two things. First since u is the root are all vertices in c are white when u is discovered. But this means that all vertices in c are descendants of u. in its depth first tree. Again by what we've seen before because all the other paths all the other ones are connected to that. And so on the other hand on the other hand no other vertex in any other strongly connected component is a descendant of you. So why is this the case? Well, all the others have been already discovered and so there cannot be a back pointer to them because they are already there. all the ones that came before and the ones that come after there cannot be an edge by Coral 2015. So they cannot be reachable from you. So they cannot be descendants of you because because of the fact that you is white when it's discovered when discovered so there cannot be a point of the dead and by Coral 2015. But that means that every strongly connected component is exactly corresponding to one of these depth first search trees of the second search and we're finished. And so this is the reason why it works. And as I said this is an important part of discovering properties of a graph. Okay we still have some time left and what we're doing next is we're talking about spanning trees. So just consider the following thing. You have to you have given you're given yeah you've given a new area of construction right? So you're building a new site a new site of houses somewhere. So you have to you have to reconstruct you have to construct new flats you have to construct new buildings and things like that. And at the time of construction you have the choice of how to actually connect all these houses to utility electricity like water electricity gas or other things. So you've got this new site of houses and what you have to plan is you have to plan to connect them all to the same network. And as it is by all of these networks whether it's gas or water or electricity you can actually get a full network by connecting any of these two buildings. So you have a site of buildings and you have to think so you can get I don't know all of these possible connections between the buildings. Like some are probably not connectable because another one is in the middle but you can have all of these connections. But what you have to do you only have to connect every single once you don't have to pull in circles so you could for example connect them like this if you liked to right this connects all of the houses and there is no circle in there so this is a tree and the tree connects all of the vertices of the original graph right this is called a spanning tree so let G V be a graph this is by the way chapter 21 it's a spanning trace let G V be graph a graph a tree is called and the graph has to be connected otherwise it's not possible so have a connected graph a tree is called a tree t equals to V and e hat is called a spanning tree tree if e hat is a subset of e so you have to take the original edges that are there and form from some of these edges a tree a tree is just the vertices are the same so that's why it's called a spanning tree and now the question is which spanning tree to choose because there are many right so and if you think about the property development project that produces utility for every of these houses then of course as you can see installing a utility line from here to here might cost more or less than installing utility line from here to here depending on who owns the property what's the soil and things like that so in reality every one of these connections has a specific price to it right depending on the length depending on how you install it and so what you're of course interested in is producing the spanning tree that costs the least of all of these spanning trees right so what we have in reality is we have weighted graph so in reality we have a weighted graph and that means we have a function a function w that maps the set of all edges to real numbers so every edge in the graph we have a real number assigned to it and the weight of a tree the weight of a spanning tree is well w of t is defined as the sum over all edges in e hat of weight of e right so just sum up all of the edges in the spanning tree and their weight and of course what you a minimal spanning tree a minimal spanning tree tree is a is a tree t that minimizes w of t and the question is how can you find minimal spanning trees which is the minimum spanning tree problem so finding a it's sorry it's called a minimum spanning tree not a minimal finding a minimum spanning tree for a given graph is called the minimum spanning! tree problem mstb interesting interesting interesting question there are actually two well-known algorithms for solving them and this is either Kruskal's or Prim's algorithm so there's Kruskal algorithm and Prim's algorithm and what's important to understand is that minimum spanning trees have a sort of sub problem optimality again so if you have a minimum spanning tree of some of these then you and you have sub trees of them they are also minimal because otherwise you could change edges and make the other tree smaller which means that basically we could solve this by some sort of dynamic programming but actually we can even solve it by some greedy algorithms and both Kruskal's and Prim's are in some sort greedy algorithms so as both of them are greedy and we know what greedy algorithm looks like and so what is basically the idea of generating a minimum spanning tree and the idea is that we can basically grow a minimum spanning tree one edge at a time because we know sub problem optimality so we can choose a minimum spanning tree and minimum spanning trees of single nodes are trivial they're just the node themselves so we can just start with a small node somewhere and then we can start to grow the minimum spanning trees and what we have to understand is that in every single step of growing the minimum spanning tree we have to choose an additional edge that is actually relevant for the minimum spanning tree so we want to grow the minimum spanning tree one edge at a time and this produces a sort of generic idea of how to do that and the generic idea is a very simple generic algorithm which I can display on the blackboard and this is this one so it is this one so we start with an empty spanning tree and then if a does not yet form a spanning tree meaning we don't have yet all the vertices we need to find an additional vertex that we can safely add to a and then we add this edge to a until we finished so this is the basic setup and the most important or most non-trivial line is line three and that says we need to find an edge that is safe to our minimum spanning tree so it has to make sure that the spanning tree stays minimal and it has to make sure that it is still a tree right so we don't want to introduce circles and the question is how can we find such safe edges and there is two possibilities and one is invented by Kruzkal and the other one is invented by Prim and so that that that's why we have two different algorithms and the first one is just a second yeah there's Kruzkal's algorithm the first one is Kruzkal's algorithm so that's doing the following thing so it again as before it starts with an empty spanning tree and then it checks every vertex it checks every vertex and makes out of every vertex a single spanning tree right so these sets that we can see here they are sets containing one vertex each because then the sub problem optimality we have the optimal spanning trees for every single of these vertices and what we want to do now is we want to put unions together so we want to make all the sets bigger so that means we take a list of all the edges in E then we sort all the edges increasingly by their weight so we take the lowest weight first the lowest weight edge first the next weight edge and so on and then we are taking any edge in the sorted list in order and then we figure out whether when we have set U and V then we figure out whether they're already in the same set right we check whether they're in the same set if the set of U and the set of V are the same then we don't have to do anything because then the edge is already done we could actually remove the edge from the list because then we've already done it otherwise we just add the edge to the tree and we put those two sets together we make a larger tree out of them so if we have two disconnected trees the new set connects to the trees and we have a bigger tree and that's it that's the only loop and the greedy idea is we take the first edge the edge with the smallest weight that is actually not yet in any of the trees right this is the one that connects that's why it's a greedy algorithm the mouse was there again this time over there doesn't find out I have no idea so this is Kruzkal's algorithm Prim's algorithm works a bit differently it initializes a min q minimal q so a q a minimal q and then it introduces the root key we start with any key here with any node here and then we grow the three outwards so this is Kruzkal's algorithm actually takes these connected trees and connects them to a large connected tree Prim's algorithm takes nodes and grows the tree by in every step so it starts by initializing all the keys to infinity and of every vertex and only for the root node the key is zero and then it inserts all the vertices into q meaning that at the beginning in the priority q only the root is on front every other thing is in the back so we have a mean priority q and then we extract the minimum from the q for every vertex and then we look for all the adjacent edges of the vertex and again we check whether any weight you're a clever mouse are you you probably want to listen to the lecture course do you probably have to take a picture really bye bye okay anyway okay so yeah so while the q is non-empty we are extracting the minimal vertex from the q and then if we have a weight h between u and v that is smaller than the weight of the end point then we just add the new vertex to the tree and and and add it actually the mouse seems to be very little in reality so it's very small so maybe it's baby mouse okay anyway time's up anyway so we will discuss the rest of the minimum spanning tree problem next week so have a nice have a nice week and see you again there you are but I guess there is nothing to eat here
