programming, so optimization methods. And before we continue with other types of algorithms, there are two more examples which are both for data science very important and so I thought it would be a good idea to talk, to discuss them in the lecture course. The first one is to find longest common subsequences in strings. So, longest common subsequences. So, we have a string, two strings, so let x and y be two strings of letters or of characters. And we want to find the longest common substring. A typical application of that is producing genetic families of animals, for example, where you know the DNA sequence because this can be now quite regularly or readily be retrieved from any even old teeth or maybe also live cells or whatever. So, you have usually in a DNA sequence, we have only four letters that correspond to the nucleic acids that are present on one side of the DNA like adenine, cytine, thymine and guanine. So, usually these ACGT sequences. And if you want to know how close they are related, you're looking for large pieces of DNA that coincide in both sides. And you know that usually there are insertions, there are deletions, there are changes, but now we're only interested in largest, longest common sub sequences. So, you have, for example, the y is equal to the y is equal to GCTACGTCATTTG or something like that. And the y is something like C, T, G, A, C, G, A, C, G, T, C, T, A, T, T, A, G or something like that. And then you can look at what common sub strings are. For example, the ATT here is a common substring. Is it the longest? Well, maybe not. There might be others like the ACGTC here is a common substring of length five. And so finding them in two strings is a problem that appears often and actually it appears in many data science applications that have to find common substrings of something. Or common sub trees or other things. So common sub something that is quite frequent. And so what you could do, of course, is you could produce all the substrings of x and all the substrings of y and then compare them with each other. And when you find some or take every common substring of x and slide it through y and check whether it fits in there. And at the end, you just keep the longest of those, right? So you would start with the G. There's of course many Gs. Then GC. You would see whether there is a GC anywhere. No, it isn't. So you can skip there because if a GC is not there, a GCT would also not be there. So you can start with the C. Well, Cs are there, then can look for CTs. There's a CT. There's a CT. So you have CTs. Next one would be CTA. CTA. Is there any with CTA? There is a CTA. Great. So now CTA C. Let's look whether the CTA C. No, there's no CTA C. So you can stop with this one and take the next one, which is a TTA and so on. So this is a valid algorithm, right? So take all the sub-seq. So unfortunately, strings have an exponential number of sub-sequences. And so the algorithm we just designed has exponential effort. And so a good idea would be to figure out whether we can do something in dynamic programming. And the first thing in dynamic programming is whether we, well, whether actually we have to recompute the same things over and over again. And if you look at that, what we just did, we have because if the sequence is longer, there might be many CT and CTAs and things like that. So even later, we will hit a CTA again and we'll check it again. So we will have the same problems over and over, especially two size things. And so the question is, how can we get proper sub-problems that we can compare? So this is always the first thing that we have to think about. If we want to change the... you have to remind me that I forgot to turn on the lights. So the first thing, if you have such problems that have exponential effort, which you might want to solve faster is you have to think whether you find proper sub-problems that actually have this optimal sub-problem property. And so what would be a good idea to do that? Well, the point is, if we look at the two strings, and they don't have to be the same length. So let's write it more abstract. So X is some X1, X2, X3, X3, and so on, up to Xn. And we have another one, which is Y, which is Y1, Y2, Y3, and so on, up to some Ym. And N and M don't necessarily have to coincide. And we want to figure out what is the longest sub-sequence of those. Well, the point is that if the last elements or the first, it doesn't matter, let's start from the back. So if the last elements of X and Y are the same, right, so what happens if Xn is equal to Yn? Then at least one thing, we have found a common sub-sequence of length 1. And then what we can check is whether, how, what is the longest common sub-sequence of the first n-1 elements in X, and the first n-1 elements in Y, right? So let's produce a notation for them, right? So we write Xk to be just the part of the sub-sequence that ends at K. And of course, K has to be small or equal to N, and the same is true for Y. So Yk is the section that is between X1 and Y1 and Yk, and K then has to be small or equal to N, right? So this is just our notation. And what is important about this problem is the following quite simple theorem. So this is theorem, the first one, which is 14.1, because we're in chapter 14. And it says the following. So let's X and Y be as above sequences, right? So as we've defined them over there, let's set being of another length, set one to set K and be along a common sub-sequence So let's look at the common sub-sequence or a common sub-string of X and Y. Okay, so we assume that we've already found it. And then we have three possibilities. The first one is if Xn is equal to Ym is equal to Zk. So if all of them are the same, the same, then set a K-1 is a longest common sub-sequence of Xn-1 and Ym-1, right? So if the longest common sub-sequence contains the final element, then we can cut the final element from all the three sequences. And then the rest of the sequence has to be the longest common sub-sequence of the rest of the others. Okay, so this is the first. The second one is, of course, what could happen is that Xm is not equal to Yn and Zk is not equal to Xm. So if Xn is not equal to Yn and Zk is not equal to Xm, then Z is a longest common sub-sequence of, well, it could still be Y, but it cannot be X. So X is one less long because it would have to be the same. So it cannot contain the Xm, so the Xn, sorry, and Y, right? So we don't know anything about Y, but we know something about X. So if Xn is not equal to Yn and Zk is not equal to Ym, then Z is a longest common sub-sequence. Sub-sequence of X and Ym-1. Sub-sequence of X. Well, of course, there is also the possibility that all of them are not equal and this is the final one, but we don't need that final for constructing our algorithm. Sub-sequence of X. So let's prove that because this is important to know. Sub-sequence of X. So if Zk is not equal to Xm, right? So this is the first case. Then what we could do is we could add Xm equal to Yn to Z. Sub-sequence of Xm equals to Yn to Z and obtain a common sub-sequence. Sub-sequence of length K plus 1, which is a contradiction because we already assumed that Z is the longest common sub-string. Sub-sequence of Xm is the same, which is a contradiction. Sub-sequence of Xm is the same, right? Because we cannot have one that is longer than K because we already assumed that Z is the longest common sub-sequence. Sub-sequence of Xm is the longest common sub-sequence of Xm. So that means that Xm is equal to Yn, which means that Xm is equal to Zk. Sub-sequence of Xm is the longest common sub-sequence of Xm, which means that Xm is the longest common sub-sequence of Xm. Sub-sequence of Xm is the longest common sub-sequence of Xm. So, we can't have Xm equal to Yn and Zk is not equal to Xm. Sub-sequence of Xm because it would lead to contradiction. That means that Xm has to be equal to Zk and since Xm and Yn are all equal, we know that all three are equal and that means that we are in case one. Sub-sequence of Xm is the longest common sub-sequence of Xm is the longest common sub-sequence of Xm. So, if we are in case one, then of course we can remove, but then we can remove Xm equals Zk equals to Yn from X, Y, and Z. Sub-sequenz is a common sub-sequenz. And Z is a common sub-sequenz. Sub-sequenz K-1 is a common sub-sequenz of Xm-1 and Ym-1 of length K-1. Now, let's assume that Z were not the longest common subsequence of X and Y . So, assume that there exists a Y, a W, which is a common subsequence. So, we have X of X and Y and Y and Y and Y of length K. So, we have X and Y . So, we have X and Y . Okay, now I have to think, which I didn't see when I was at home. I'm preparing for the course. Let me see. This is strange. The argument in the book is strange. Let me write it down and let's discuss it because I think it's wrong. So, assume that there exists a common subsequence, W, of X and Y of length K. Then, it says we can append Xn equals to Ym to W and get a common subsequence of length K plus 1. K plus 1, which is a contradiction. When I read this through yesterday at night, when I came back, I thought this was clear. But now, when I'm trying to explain it to you, I think it's just plain wrong. Why? Why? Because what could happen is that the subsequence W doesn't end at the end. It could be the first K and then I can't extend it by putting the Xm equals to Xn to the back. And so, I can't see why this should be true. Well, it isn't actually. The question is whether it matters or not. So, let's think about it. Well, I think it doesn't end. Well, the argument is wrong. So, this is wrong. So, what the book says is wrong. We have to do a case distinction. Okay? So, the first thing, let's assume that W is a common subsequence of Xn minus 1 and Yn minus 1 of length K plus 1. If it's of length K plus 1, then it's a contradiction. So, let's fix the proof. Okay, this is a contradiction because this is also then a common subsequence of X and Y. So, let's assume there exists a W, which is a common subsequence of Xn minus 1 and Yn minus 1 of length K plus 1. Then W is also a common subsequence of X and Y, which is a contradiction. So, this is a contradiction because this is longer than said. Than said. So, this is a contradiction. A contradiction. Okay. Otherwise, which means that point 1 of the theorem is plain wrong because we've just found a counterexample. And so, I need to think about it in a different way. Oh, so, set K minus 1 is not the longest common subsequence of Xn minus 1 and Xn minus 1. This is just wrong. I can write down a counterexample. So, let's see. So, we have A, A, A, A, which is of length 4. And here we have A, A, A, A, A, which is of length 4. Then we have G, G, G and a C, C, C, C, right? C, C, C, C, C, C. And we have here a T, T, T, C, C, C, C. Okay. So, those are two sequences, right? The longest common subsequence has length 4. Right? Now, C, C, C, C, C is the longest common subsequence of the two. So, we can plug in this. This is X, this is Y, and this is Z. Right? And now, the last elements coincide. And so, we can cut off the last elements of all of them, leaving this and this subsequence. But C, C, C, C is not the longest common subsequence of those two. Because A, A, A, A, A is. Right? Which means that the first point of this theorem is plain wrong. And so, we found an error in the book. So, now let's try to salvage that. We try to salvage it by, well, let's see. Next time when I do the lecture course, I will know that already. I'll probably also write it to the authors, because that's probably something worth correcting. So, what do we know? We know that either Z is the longest common subsequence of X and Y and Y and Y, or there is another one of length K. So, or X and Y have a longest common subsequence of length K. Okay. So, this salvages the theorem, because this is correct. Right? Because we've just proved that it cannot be of length K plus one. It cannot be of length less than K minus one, because then Z would be a longest common subsequence of the two. Or we can find another one that has length K. Okay? So, this is something we have just proved. Okay. Now, let's go to second, to the second point. The second point is if ZK, so second, if ZK is not equal to XN and XM is not equal to YM. And we've already seen that this is the only possibility. So, if XN is not equal to YM, then ZK cannot be equal to XN, because otherwise we would be in point one. That's something we've already proved. So, those have to be true. And then, if this is true, since ZK is not equal to XN, then Z is a common subsequence of XN minus one, because the last element of X cannot be in there and Y. And it has to be longest, because it cannot have a longer one. Because if it were a longer one, it would also be a common subsequence of X and Y, which is really a contradiction. So, and there cannot be a longer one. Okay. And the third one is just similar to two, so like case two. Okay. So, now the new theorem is true and we've proved it. Okay. Great. So, let's get the consequences from that theorem. Okay. Now let's construct an algorithm. Now let's think about an algorithm. Okay. So, how do we figure out how this can help us? Right? So, now we found this distinction. Either all the elements coincide at the end. Okay. If they coincide at the end, we might have two possibilities. Either there is another common subsequence of length K or Z cut by one is the common, longest common subsequence of the rest. Right? Now, let's think about what we can do on this occasion. Okay. So, we'll think about the recursive solution first and then we're trying to do a bottom-up method as before. Okay. So, let's think. If we have our two sequence, X and Y. We basically have two possibilities. Right? The first possibility is that the final two elements of X and Y coincide. Right? So, we have a case distinction. Case one is Xn is equal to Ym. Right? And case two is they're not equal. Okay. So, if Xn is equal to Ym, we have two possibilities. The first possibility is the longest common subsequence ends at the end. Right? Or the longest common subsequence does not end at the end. Right? So, let's take case one one. So, case one dot one is the longest common subsequence of X and Y ends at Xn and Ym. Right? So, the longest common subsequence does not contain Xn and Ym. And the case 1, 2, the longest common subsequence of X and Y does not contain X, N, and Y, M. Right? So these are the only two possibilities. Either it contains both of them or it contains none of them. Right? And if it contains both of them, then we are in the first part of case 1, of theorem 1, which says that we have to find the longest common subsequence of the rest of both. And it has to end at the end again. Right? So in that case, the LCS is an LCS of X, N minus 1 and Y, M minus 1. It has length K minus 1, but still it's the longest common subsequence. Right? If the longest common subsequence, and it can have two possibilities actually. Either it is the rest or it's not and it's somewhere else. And the second one is if it does not contain X, N, and Y, M, we know that it doesn't contain X, N, and Y, M. And we also can cut both of them. So that means that the LCS is an LCS of X, N minus 1 and Y, M minus 1. So no matter whether the ends are an element of the longest common subsequence or they are not, the longest common subsequence is still the longest common subsequence of both X, N minus 1 and Y, M minus 1. Right? So in both cases, we can just drop the equal element at the end. The only thing that we have to know is whether we end at the end. This is the only thing we know. Right? If we reconstruct the longest common subsequence, this is important to know. But apart from that, not. So this is case 1. Now we have case 2. And case 2 says that X, N is not equal to Y, M. Right? So X, N is not equal to Y, M. If X, N is not equal to Y, M, we are either in case 2 or in case 3 of the theorem. And that says, that basically says that the longest common subsequence is either a longest common subsequence of X, N minus 1 and Y, or it's a longest common subsequence of X, N minus 1. Right? So, but this implies the LCS is either an LCS of X, N minus 1 and Y, or an LCS of X and Y, N minus 1. Right? So those are the two only possibilities. Now, but that now enables us, no matter that the theorem was wrong, doesn't matter. So the consequence is the nice thing. The consequence says that we only have to take these two sequences. We can check whether they coincide at the end. If they coincide at the end, we cut both ends and we look for the longest common subsequence in the rest. Or if they don't coincide, we have a case distinction. So either we cut X by 1 or we cut Y by 1 and we have to find the longest common subsequence of any of the two. Right? So either both sequences reduce by 1 or at least one of them reduces by 1. But that tells us also that the process will eventually end because the sequences are a finite length. And so the sum of the lengths of the two sequences is finite, which means the sum of the lengths of the sequences reduces by at least one in every step. So the number of steps that we have to take will be finite. And that means that we can do some sort of recursive operation. However, the recursive operation is bad because that splits the tree into many binary sub-things and this makes the tree really big. It makes it exponentially big. So we have to think about something that is more sensible than that. And so we again have the same thing. So what we do know, and this is the important thing about case 1.1 and case 1.2, this tells us that this problem again is sub-problem optimal. Right? Because we have, we find the optimal by the optimal of a sub-problem. And this is also the optimal is found by the optimal of two sub-problems, but both of them are sub-problem optimal. So this is a sub-problem optimal problem. And that means that it might be interesting for trying dynamic programming. So this is the important first step. You have to check for your problems, whether it's sub-problem optimal. If it's sub-problem optimal, you can try dynamic programming. So when is dynamic programming any good? It's then any good if you run into exponential things by repeatedly checking the same sub-problems again and again. This is something we had before. So both are right, which means, and are the sub-problems independent? That's probably the next thing. Well, in some sense, yes, because we just remove stuff. We don't, so solving the sub-problem for x, n minus 1 and y does not have an influence on the sub-problem of x and y and minus 1. It's just basically independent. So all three things that we need are definitely correct. And so we can try to do dynamic programming approach to hopefully solve this problem, not in exponential time, but in a polynomial time. Okay, so how could we do that now? Now, what do we know about our solution? So what we do know, we can introduce for all of the pairs of cuts that we have, we can introduce the optimal length, the optimal length of the common subsequence. So let Cij be the length of the longest common subsequence of xi and yj. Right? So this is a nice thing. So this is well defined. Right? So we start with the section starting from the beginning. And so what do we know about Cij? Well, we do know about Cij. What is Cij? So Cij is... So we have two possibilities which correspond to these two cases. So it is either Cij-1 and J-1. And now the recursive formula we have to think through because the recursive formula that is in the book now is wrong. And because the theorem was wrong, so the recursive formula is wrong as well. So let's do two things. So this is either Cij-1, J-1 plus 1 if one thing happens or it is Cij-1 and J-1. Or it is the maximum of Cij-1 and Cij-1, J. So this is case two. This is the simple one. Now we have to do a case distinction. And the first one is if it ends, if the longest common subsequence ends at the end or if it doesn't end at the end. So how do we make sure that... And of course it's zero. We have to say it's zero if I is zero or J is zero. So we have to stop the recursion at some point. So let's say if at end or otherwise, if not at end. However, we check that. Okay, so the formula looks like this. Okay, now. And of course, if Xi is not equal to Yj and this is if Xi is equal to Yj. So this is also something. Okay, great. Now, so this is the recursive formula. And using the recursive formula, we can now solve our problem. So how can we solve our problem? Well, how do we do that? Well, this somehow tells us that what we need to know in order to compute Cij, we need to know Cij minus 1, J minus 1, and Cij minus 1, and Cij minus 1, J, right? So those are the ones we know. And what do we want to compute? We want to compute C, M, M. Because this is, if we have a sequence of length N and a sequence of length N, then we have to compute C and M. Okay, so how could we do that? Well, of course, we would start with shorter lengths. Right? So since we need to compute C and M, what we need to compute first is at least C and M, and M, and C and M minus 1. And already I said before that what does the recursion do? The recursion cuts off one thing from the common length of N and M. So that's the best idea is to put this up from bottom by the common length of X and Y. Right? So the first thing we would compute is C0, 0. Right? So C0, 0 of course is 0, which is simple. This is common length 0. So this is done. The next one would be common length 1. Common length 1 has only two possibilities, which is 0, 1, and which is 0, and is 1, 0, or which is also 0, which is simple. Right? So we could keep the zeros out of the table if we wanted to, but it's easier just to fill them because... So now we have common sequences of length 2. Common length 2. So what are the ones of common length 2? Well, we have 0, 2, which is of course 0. Then we have 1, 1. And then we have 2, 0, which is again 0. But the 1, 1 now is interesting. Why? Because the 1, 1 has to check whether Xi is equal to XJ or whether it isn't. Right? So if X1 is equal to Y1, then C1, 1 is 1. And because the common length is at the end. And so this is either 1 if X1 is equal to Y1 or it's 0. If this is not the case. Right? The next thing would be common subsequences of length 3. So let's try this first. So you know how I'm developing a correct algorithm by thinking it through. So we do know that 0, 3 is trivial. This is 0. Then we have 1, 2. Then we have 2, 1. And we have 3, 0, which is again 0. And this is the first non-trivial case. Right? So the first non-trivial case here, we have a case distinction to make. And the case distinction is we have to check whether X1 is equal to Y2. Right? So if X1 is equal to Y2, then we have to reduce both of them by 1. One of them is 0. So it's the common subsequences at the end. And then we have a common subsequence of length 1. And if it's not equal to Y2, then this is just C11 plus 0. And because the other one is 0, this is 0 plus 0 is 0. So this is the first case. And here we are just the other way around. So this is 1 if X2 is equal to Y1. And C11 if otherwise. Okay. So we are still not at the non-trivial place. So the non-trivial place apparently is common length 4. And so I have to write it down once more. So we have 0, 4. We have 1, 3. We have 2, 2. And the 2, 2 case is the non-trivial one. So we have 3, 1. And we have 4, 0. So we know that this is 0. We know that this is 0. And so what is the common length of 1, 3? And this is, again, the same case distinction as here. So this is either 1 if... No. Yeah. This is either 1 if X1 is equal to Y3. Or is this C12? No. It's... Yeah. It's C12. This is the other possibility. And this is the same. This is 1 if X3 is equal to Y1 or is this C21. So this is the other one. And now we have C22. And the C22 is the non-trivial case. The C22 is if X2 is equal to Y2 or otherwise. If X2 is not equal to Y2, we have the maximum of C21 and C12. Right? Right? But here we have to check. And the question is now whether C11 was equal to 1 or not. Right? So this is definitely C11 plus 1. It's always... So it's also not the... This is also not the... It's also not the non-trivial case. So now you can see why they got it wrong. Because they tried everything until 4. Apparently, the problems start when you're later than 4. You might be at 5 or 6. The problem starts. Okay. So let's get a proper algorithm out of that. Let's get a proper algorithm out of that. Okay. So... How can we do that? So if... Yeah. So we're going through the common length of both of them. Which means that... How do they... No, they do it in row major order. Not in common length order. So they do a different algorithm. Which makes things a bit... More... Okay. They do it differently. Is this working? Let me see. They start. What are they doing? Okay. I think the algorithm they propose is working. Because this is... They avoid the problem by cutting the loop short. Okay. Okay. So this is one possibility to do it. They do it the other way. I forgot. Because I was so involved into trying to correct the error in the book. That I didn't think whether they made the error. But still produced an algorithm that was correct. Because this is a computer science book. And I'm quite sure that if they would publish an algorithm that is wrong, then very soon somebody would realize that and would notify the authors. And so very likely that the algorithm that is in the book is correct. Well, I'll project it and we'll check it. I didn't think about this yesterday night. I came back at 2 o'clock in the morning from abroad. So I was quite tired thinking about the stuff in the lecture course. So let's see. And I have to turn off the lights of the blackboard. So let's see. But the proof is still wrong. And the theorem is still wrong. So let's see whether the algorithm is correct. But I guess yes. Because that would have been some debate. If the algorithm had been wrong. So what's happening? All the time the same shit. So now it's there. Okay, great. So this is the algorithm that they are doing. So what are they doing? They are producing two tables. The first table is probably not so important. It is just for remembering where we went. So what we cut and what we didn't. So this is the table B. The interesting one is the table C. Which contains all the best known sequence lengths. They won the C that we had up there. So what are they doing? Of course they are pre-initializing all the boundaries with zero. So that's what we also do, right? So they are initializing all the ones where either side is zero by zero. Which is the first two for loops. And then they are doing the calculation on the length of Y. So they are starting with Ys of length one to M. So they are doing the algorithm first through Y and then inside of Y through all of X. And so what are they doing? So if Xi is equal to Yj, they just add to Ci-1, Ci-1. They add one to get the CiJ. Which is the one that we've seen is wrong if we just use the theorem. So now let's think whether this might lead to something wrong. And let's take our counter example from below. And let's see what the algorithm is doing. I will shorten the counter example a bit to make it viable. So let's see, let's say AAGCC and the other one is AATCC. This is also a counter example, right? Which is simpler. So that's why length four was probably not enough. Well, we could, yeah, that's why length four was not enough. So we had to do five. In order to find the problem. So let's see. Let's go through that, the algorithm. So for I equals 1 to M, which means we have to go from 1 to 5. So let's start with I equals to 1. And for I equals to 1, we are here. So this is the A. And for J equals 1 to M. Okay, let's start with J equals 1 to N. So the first one is if this is true, so Xi is equal to Y, J, making C11 to be equal to 1. So now we have C1, 1 is 1. The next thing is J equals to 2. So J equals to 2 is here, so we are still at 1. So if Xi is equal to Y, J, which is also true, makes things again 1. Okay, so we are again at 1. And then we have... Oh yeah, so that's what they are doing, right? They're checking what we are up there. So no, they check now. The next one is wrong. So they check zeros, which is true. So Ci minus 1, J is a zero. So this is zero is greater or equal to... The other one is 1, 1. This is not true, which means that the first if is false, the else if is false, meaning that the else is true. So the else is true, meaning that C1, 2 is equal to... No. What? That C1, 2 is equal to C1, 1. Right, so C1, 1 is 1, so C1, 2 is also 1. C1, 2 is equal to 1. Okay, why not? Okay, great. Now we are at J equals to 3, which is this here. No, that was... Wait, that was J equals to 3. Let's see, C1, 3. Ah. I have too little space. So... Let's see, 1, 2. That was C1, 2. C1, 2 is C0. So C1, 2 is 1, yes, that's what we had. And the next one is C1, 3. And C1, 3 is the same as C1, 2, which means that C1, 3 is also 1. Okay, great. The next one is C1, 4. And C1, 4 is the same as C1, 3 for the same reason, which means that C1, 4 and C1, 5 is also 1. Okay, great. Now, the next thing is... Which is true, by the way. So, the longest common subsequence of... Ah, Y and M. Oh, shit. Anyway. So, this is the X, this is the Y. Okay, next thing is C2. So, now we have 2, X2, right? So, the next one is this one. So, we have AA. And we have X2. So, C2, 1. What is C2, 1? So, we have to check whether the second one is the same as the first one, which is correct. So, C2, 1 is equal. And then we have... This is the same as C1, 0 plus 1, which is 1. Which is correct. The next is C2, 2. Okay, so this is the first interesting one, which has to be 2. So, C2, 2 is C1, 1 plus 1, which is 2. Yeah. Okay, so this is why it works. Because it goes through the sequences in a very, very specific order. And does not really do the recursion that they said in the book before. Because they fill the table in a different way. So, the algorithm in the book is correct. But, I think... But, well, let's see. Probably I'm too fast. Somebody could run that. So, C2, 2 is 2. C2, 3 is... They're not equal. And so... C1, 3 is... C1, 3 is greater or equal nothing. Because C1, 3 is greater or equal to C2, 2. Which is wrong. Which means that we have C2, 3 is the same as C2, 2. Which is 2. Yeah. C2, 3 is 2. And C2, 4 is 2 as well. And C2, 5 is also 2. And C2, 5 is greater or equal to C2. Okay. And yeah. And so, it will not... Another interesting question is whether it will become 3 by 4. But it will not. So, yeah. So, that's why it works. Because they do a different recursion than the one they said. So, they start with the recursion from the beginning. And they always check the maximum thing over there, which is in line 11. So, the algorithm is correct. The proof of the book is wrong. But the algorithm is correct. Okay. So, sorry that it took so long. But I didn't think about this when I read it in the morning. Okay. Okay. So, they produced the correct algorithm, still, despite having an error in the book. Okay. Great. Now, well, and the reason basically is it doesn't really matter whether there is a longest common subsequence of the same length before. Like here, the only thing you have to make sure is that the longest common subsequence later is not counted as one to many. But this can't happen because they start building them from the beginning. And so, this never happens because the longest common subsequence will have been detected already when we are at the end. And by checking whether we have something that is bigger already, we don't add the one at the end. So, this is why eventually it works. But, yeah, but still the proof is wrong. Okay. So, this was the first problem. And the algorithm is in the book and the algorithm is correct. Okay. This one on. This one off. And let's continue. Okay. So, the last thing that we are talking about is binary search trees, again. So, let's talk about binary search trees. So, this is something we already discussed today in the exercises class. So, binary search trees are obvious for searching. So, let's think about the following case. We want to build a dictionary, right? So, we want to do an automatic translation program. Which is not an LLM. So, one of the old ones. Or some other translation method, right? So, you want to translate keywords from programming languages into others or anything like that. So, you want to associate stuff to other stuff. For example, for data science purposes, you might want to produce a phone book or something like that. Or any other things. Or any other things. Where you have to search for elements in the tree that are constructed out of words. So, you have words or letters or whatever. So, you have words. And you produce a map from words to words. A map. And you want to search this map as fast as possible. And, of course, we know that if you take any of the balanced trees, like red-black trees, we know that this association can be kept updated and searched in order of LGN time. So, this is something we know. So, e.g. A red-black tree can be used to store that map. So, you can see that map and then insertion, deletion and search are order of LGN. Now, this is great. It enables you to be fast. We have, by the way, a second possibility to do that. What was the other one? If you remember what we already did in the lecture course. What would be another possibility to store such data structure? Do we have a map that maps words to words? What would be another possibility to store such? Hmm? Exactly. So, how are dictionaries in Python implemented? We've already discussed the data structure before we did the binary search trees. We can use the hash table. So, hash tables is the other possibility. You can use hash tables or you can use binary search trees. So, why might this be a problem? Just if you think about it, we store it in a binary search tree. So, we know that every operation can be done in LG of N time. So, what is important if you are fast, if you're as fast as possible? And you want to look up words all the time. Let's think about you translate. You look up words from a text, from a book. You have a large book. And you look up all the words and crudely want to translate it. Right? You want to replace every word by a word in another language. Even if the text doesn't make sense grammatically. But just think that you want to replace them. If you think about words, what is an important thing? What we always disregard when we're doing hash tables or when we're doing binary search trees or other things. When we calculate the number of operations it takes to actually solve our problem. The search problem, the insert problem and all the other things. What is one crucial thing that we always somehow assume? We assume that all the data that is coming in has the same frequency. Right? It's equally distributed more or less. Right? So, for binary search trees, we have computed that the worst case running time is order of LGN. Right? So, they are quite fast. But if you have a huge book, LGN might be something. It might not be huge, but it might be 50 or something. Or 50 not, but 20 maybe. Which is 20? You have to do 20 comparisons between strings, which takes some time. Probably not the longest, but it takes some time. Right? So, the question is, how does this map to the practical use of that search tree? This is something you always have to think about. Right? So, you have a problem as a data scientist. You want to solve problems as a data scientist. And in order to solve the problems, that's why this lecture is for. The lecture is for the fact that in order to perform some tasks, you have to store the data first. So, data science is mostly fighting against data and then analyzing it. That's really the case. So, whenever you do a practical data science project, you will see that of the time it takes to actually solve the data science problem, 90% is spent to properly arrange the data. And 10% is spent to do the analysis. So, this is always the case. And hustling around with the data has several aspects. The first one is obtaining the data in the first place. Which takes 50% of the time. Because nobody will give you the data like this and say, here is your data structure filled with your data. Do whatever you like. They will tell you, well, I know this is stored in that database. This is stored on that file. And so on. So, this is the common case. Not the seldomly used case. So, struggling with the data and getting it together is half the work already done. Then cleaning out the data to make it consistent takes the next 90% of the remaining time. Because that's also usually complete rubbish. If you get data from the customers, there will be typos in there. There will be missing data in there. Or whatnot. So, we'll have to... And then you have the rest of the work. And half of the rest of the work, at least, is storing it in a data structure that helps you to actually analyze the problem. And this is something we can do here. So, this is why the lecture course is there. Now, think about this translation thing. You want to analyze stuff that is probably... For a neural network, you get texts in terabytes of size. You have 100 terabytes of data that you need to analyze in order to get your thing. And you have to search. You have to count. Just assume that you only have to count words. Just counting them is already an issue if you have 100 terabytes of data. And there's probably a million words in the English language altogether. Or maybe a bit less, maybe a few hundred thousand. But there are a few hundred thousand. And so, you have to arrange that somehow. Maybe you arrange it in a search tree, right? Where you store from words to numbers or something like that. So, what will happen? What will happen is that you will encounter the word there quite often. Right? The word ogenesis will be very rare. So, the binary search tree would be a nuisance if ogenesis would be the root of the tree. And there would be the 50th... It would be a leaf in the 50th level down there. Because that basically means that for... I don't know how many this are in the English language. What I would guess it's every 10th word probably. Or every 20th word at least. So, 5% of all your text will be this. And you will spend traversing the search tree until you're hitting a leaf, right? Which is probably not ideal. So, balancing the tree might be nice for having the order of log n operation. But if you have to search 10 trillion times, then that makes a difference. Whether the frequent words are on top of the tree and the rare words are at the bottom, right? So, then balancing doesn't matter. If ogenesis, which you probably hit 4 times in all of the data, is even in level 200 of the tree. It doesn't matter as much as if you hit there, which you will encounter, let's say, a trillion times in all of these 100 terabytes of data. When you traverse it more than, let's say, two steps, right? So, balancing a tree is nice, theoretical, but it's not so nice if the data you encounter has some probability to encounter it, which is coming together with the data, right? And this is something you have to think about. So, if you're taking a data structure, it should be adapted not theoretically to what you're doing, but it should be adapted to what you're really doing, right? And if you're looking for words, then they're very frequent ones and they're very rare ones. And by the rare ones, it doesn't matter basically where they are. For the frequent ones, it doesn't matter. So, you want to have the frequent ones on top of the search tree. Even if the search tree later is not balanced properly, that hurts you less than if you have to traverse in a balanced tree to the leaf 10 trillion times. Yeah, this makes a difference. Okay, so that means for some search operations, especially if the data is not equally distant, distributed, you can ask for optimal search trees. And this is the next interesting question that we want to talk about. So, what is an optimal search tree? And there is a very small example in the book, which is this one here, which you can't see because... Because it is blocked by... Okay, let's get this bigger. Okay, so here we have words with different frequencies. And so, it's just any words, right? So, we have the Ds and the Ks, and the Ks have a probability, as you can see, that is comparatively higher than the probabilities of the Ds. And both of the trees look nice. The left one looks significantly more balanced than the right one, right? So, the left one could very well be a red-black tree, where the nodes K3 and K5 are red. And then it's already a balanced red-black tree. And the right one is quite imbalanced. So, apparently, the traversing from K2 to D2 is much longer than the traversing from K2 to D5, for example. And so, but still, if you consider the probabilities and the calculation is done there, you can see that the right tree, which is imbalanced, on average, takes less time than the tree on the left, which is the balanced red-black tree, which has an average contribution of 2.8 searches or comparisons, where the right one has an average contribution of 2.8 searches or comparisons. Just by counting the number of hops and comparisons you take with the frequency of the operation that you have to take. Okay? So, that means that the search for that optimal search tree is viable. But having all possible trees and comparing them for probabilities is probably something we can't do, because there is an exponential number of trees. And so, we have to think on how we could do that. Okay, let's get rid of that again and let's discuss that. Okay, so, if we know the probability for each search, what we could do is we could compute the estimated search cost in our tree, right? For all the data that we have, which is an estimated value, and the estimated value tells us basically how these things are done together, right? So, the estimation is basically depends on the depth of the tree of the node that we're at, and the probability that we actually have to go there. And so, what do I want to say? Now, I lost my thread by traversing it over there. So, yeah, right. So, what we wanted to do is basically want to figure out how these trees are built. So, what is the likely estimated value of our search in the binary tree? So, it basically says we know that searching means traversing the height of the node, right? So, it's traversing the height of the node, and it's probably, so the probability, not the probability, the expected value of the search is basically a sum. It says the depth of the node times the probability we need that node, right? So, this is at the end, the expected value of the contribution of the search. And we want to minimize that, right? So, this is the idea. In order to do that, we can, we, what we also have to do is we also have to figure out what happens in the search. What happens when the search fails, right? Because searches can be successful or searches can fail, right? So, we do not only have words that are in the tree, but we also have words that are outside of the tree or strings that are not in the tree. So, we know that whenever we search for a word, we can either hit the key that the word is there or we have to traverse a specific path to the bottom of the tree. Right? So, then we have a final comparison and that final comparison tells us that we fell off the end and falling off the end is also a viable search. It ends up with, I haven't found it, we need to insert the word, the new word into the tree, but it's a viable search that we also have to count. So, we also have to count the probability that we fall off the tree, right? And so, this is basically the picture we have there. I'll show it again. So, the K's in this table, the K's in this table, and I said it wrong before. So, the K's in the table are the keys that are actually in the tree and the D's in the table are all the children of the K's which are the searches that are not successful. Right? So, the D's are the searches that are not successful, the K's are the searches for words in the tree. And so, the D0 are all the words that in the book come before K1. The D1 are all the words that are between K1 and K3 and so on, right? And that's their probabilities. These are the ones that you also have to count. And so, only the round nodes. The round nodes in these pictures are the real tree and the square nodes in the pictures are the missing ends where the search falls off if you don't find the proper word. So, I didn't... And all of those contributions are in the trees. Okay. So, what is then the end, the final expected value? Well, the final expected value, of course, sums up all the probabilities of the nodes that are in the tree, plus all the probabilities of the words that are not in the tree, and traversing to where they would be in the tree. So, we could just add them and analyze the large tree. So, D0 captures all the words that are smaller lexicographically than K1, and D1 captures all that are in between and so on. Okay? Great. So, this is how such a search tree looks like. And now, what we have to think about is how do we find an optimal search tree. Okay. So, and the question is, and probably since it's already five... Well, let me think. Is this doable in five minutes or do I have to repeat everything else next time? Well, we can at least talk about the structure and then we do the rest next time. Okay. Now, if we have a search tree, then what we know already from discussing binary search trees is that whenever we have a node and we look at the subtree of that node, this is also a proper binary search tree. So, subtree of binary search trees are again binary search trees. So, this is something we've already done. So, that means that subproblems like looking for the left and the right subtree are proper subproblems. That's the first thing that is true. We already know that we have an exponential number of binary search trees of the same length, of the same number of nodes in there. And the point is that whenever we have a subtree that contains a specific number of keys that are in there, so let's say the keys KI to KJ, then it also has to contain all the keys of the Ds that represent the falloff searches. Right? All the ones that are between them have to be in the same subtree because of the ordering property of binary search trees. Right? Okay. So, that's the second thing. And so, that means if we have an optimal subtree there and an optimal subtree there, we can paste them together by one node and get an optimal subtree of the larger one. That means that indeed what we do have is the optimal subproblem property. Right? So, that means that whenever we have a tree and a node, we can cut the two left and right things and so we can decide which node to put in the middle. This is the decision that we can take. And then we can take the optimal subtree on the left and the optimal subtree on the right and piece them together as the two children and still have an optimal tree that contains the node. If we choose another node of this tree, then we have another balance, but it's still the decomposition still has to be optimal, which means that it has the optimal subproblem property. And we could again think about doing this by a bottom-up method or by some other dynamic programming method. And how this dynamic programming method works is we'll be doing next week because time's up for today. And if you have time and want to be seen at a university, pro-university demo, today is the demo against cutting of funding for the university. I will put it up again. So, I wish you all a nice time.
