6, 8, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 19. Okay. So, I'm very glad that at least 19 people have showed up of the 100 or something that registered for the course. Seems to be that that's related to being at 8 o'clock in the morning. I just tell it online. So, I have to get up in the morning very early, which is also a nuisance for me because I'm also a night owl. So, I also like to work in the night and not in the morning. Still, I'm here. I'm here in the morning. Because I also have to be here in the morning. So, that's my rule. If only – so, you're great because you're here. If only a quarter of the people show up regularly, then I will stop the recording. And you can read it in the book anyway. Okay. Great. Or maybe another thing would be I will record it, but I will not publish the recording until two weeks after I've done the lecture course. Okay. Anyway. Now, we are at – yesterday – last time, we started with divide-and-conquer algorithm for sorting. So, I presented very quickly at the end of the last lecture course. I presented merge sort. And I will project it onto the screen again. It contains two operations. The first one is merge that actually combines two algorithms that are already – oh, come on. Okay. It takes some time. Apparently, now it starts up. Oh, I'm stupid. This is not the – okay. So, it will take a bit of time to show up. It contains two procedures. The first one is merge. That merge is two arrays that are already sorted into one array. And we've seen last time how that works. So, you have basically two stacks of numbers or cards or whatever you like. And since they're already sorted, you know that the smallest element in the array will be the smaller of the two top elements. And so, you take the smaller of the two top elements, copy it to a new array. And then what shows up is the next element. And again, you have to only compare the two on the top. And if one of the stacks is empty, you just shuffle the rest of the stack of one of the array because they will be bigger than all of the elements of the left. They're to the end of the array. And why doesn't this show up? This is annoying, really. Okay. So, this is the algorithm that actually arranges two sorted arrays into a new one. So, we start with having the first range to the so-called left stack, which is L. The other range to the right stack, which is R. And then we just compare. And we can see it in line 13. You always compare the left with the right one. And if the left one is smaller, you copy the left one onto the resulting array. And otherwise, you copy the right one into the resulting array. And you always count up the corresponding indices. So, the K index is the index into the new array. The I index is the index into the left. And the J index is the index into the right stack. And once all of them have gone, so either of them is empty, we copy the rest of the other, which is the Y loop at the end. So, either the left stack still contains elements or the right stack still contains elements. Anyway, one of them will be empty, the other will not. And then you copy the rest of the elements onto the array A, which is the merge operation. And now, as you can see, every element of the two stacks is only copied once, right? So, there are N operations for N elements. And there are comparisons in addition. The worst, what can happen, is that all the comparisons show up empty and you copy all the stack of one side. So, apparently what happens is for every copy operation, you take at most one comparison operation. The only thing that can happen is to take less comparison operations because all the one array is already smaller than the other one. But you at most also use N comparison operations. So, you take at most N comparison operations and take at most N copy operations. And so, all of these loops together are at most executed N times. So, merging two arrays is a matter that is theta of N, right? So, this is quite simple to analyze. So, the problem is the other one, which is actually the algorithm merge sort itself. And we discussed it for a very short time. So, we want to sort the array that starts from P and ends at R. So, what do we do? First, we check whether the array is already empty or only contains a single element, which means that P is greater or equal R. And then we don't have to do anything because a single element is already sorted. And if this is not the case, we basically cut it in two. So, we calculate the midpoint between P plus R and P, so between P and R. If it's an odd number, so then we round up and then we round down because this is what this bracket means. This bracket means to round down. It's a floor operation. And there is a corresponding one which has the bracket part upstairs, which is the ceiling operation. So, there's two of them. One of them always rounds down. The other one always rounds up. And so, it splits the array roughly into two. But the lower one might contain one element more than the upper one because we... No, the other way around. Sorry. The lower one might contain one element less than the upper one because we're rounding down. And then we're sorting the left part of the array with merge sort recursively. And then we sort the right part of the array recursively. And then we end up with two parts of the array. Both of them are sorted. And then we merge them with the procedure we've discussed above. So, this is the so-called divide and conquer algorithm. Why? Because it subdivides the problem into smaller parts and then takes an operation that finalizes everything in order to combine the two already divided solutions into a large solution. So, this is how it works. So, first you have a step that actually helps you to divide the problem into two. Then you call the operation recursively on the two sub-problems. And then you have an operation that takes the solutions of the sub-problems and combines them into a solution of the large problem. And now what we have to discuss is how we can analyze these operations. And this is something we will discuss next. Okay. So, now we want to analyze a divide and conquer algorithm. Okay. So, what did we talk about? How does it work? Well, the idea, of course, is again we introduce a number T of N. And T of N is the time or the resources, usually the time, the operations. It takes to solve a sub-problem of size N. Okay. So, this is something we introduced. And this is actually the function we want to estimate with our Lando symbols, right? And so, now, what does the divide and conquer algorithm do? It starts with the divide operation, right? So, the first operation in the algorithm is the divide operation. This also takes some time. D of N. This is the divide operation. So, time it takes for size N. Then, we call our algorithm recursively. And after calling it recursively, we combine the two solutions, which is the combine operation. So, combine operation. So, this is the time the combine operation takes. And now, how do T of N and D of N and C of N relate to each other? Well, what we know is that the time it takes to solve a sub-problem of size N, the first thing we do is we divide it. Then, afterwards, we subdivide the problem into parts, into, let's say, A parts. So, we take A parts and the size is divided by some number B. And afterwards, we add the combine operation of size N. So, this is a general divide and conquer algorithm. But, of course, this cannot be true completely because we have to think about one more thing. And this is how long it takes to solve the smallest sub-problem we want to look at, right? The smallest sub-problem we want to look at usually is, like in the divide and conquer sort algorithm, merge sort, is an area of size 1 or an area of size 0. Both of them, of course, take no time, basically. They take constant time. So, usually, what we have is that divide and conquer algorithm of the constant of the small thing. And the small thing shall be something like a limit size, N0. So, this is only true if N is at least N0. And this is true if N is smaller than N0. So, how does this look like for merge sort? Well, in merge sort, we have that D of N, which is the divide of merge sort. D of N is theta of 1. Why? Because the only thing for dividing and divide in merge sort is just to calculate what the midpoint of the area is, right? This is only one operation. This always takes the same time. No matter how large the area is, I only have to add two numbers, divide them by two, and round them down, which is a very simple operation for a computer. So, this is only a theta of 1. So, we do know how long it takes to combine them, which is the merge operation. The merge operation we just discussed takes theta of N steps. Because we have to grab every single element and copy it down. And now, how are A and B related in merge sort? Well, we roughly divide our problem in two sub-problems of half the size. Of course, we round them down or round them up. So, it's not really half the size, but it's N over 2 rounded down plus N over 2 rounded up. But if N is large and we want to calculate things asymptotically, so if we want to sort the 100 million numbers, it doesn't matter whether we have 50 million and 1 or 49 million, 999,000 and 999 elements. So, this doesn't really matter a lot. So, we will just write it down without rounding for the moment. So, T of N, therefore, is, well, C of N plus D of N is a theta of N plus a theta of 1. A theta of N plus a theta of 1 is a theta of N. And then we have 2 times T times N over 2 because we subdivide it basically in half of the elements. And then we add a theta of N. So, this is the recursion we are talking about. And the question now is how to solve such a recursion, right? We need to figure out what T of N satisfies. So, what is N0? This is the other thing. So, this is, so we know that N0 is 1. So, if N is smaller or equal to 1, we have theta of 1. And if N is bigger than 1, we have this formula. Okay, so this is the question. How do we actually compute a solution to that? And for the moment, I will just tell you the result. So, this implies that T of N is theta of N log N. And we will discuss why this is in a moment. So, we will discuss how to solve these recursive relations. But before we can analyze this easily, we should write down a few properties of our Landau symbols that we've been talking about. So, we will be back in chapter 3, where last time we discussed the Landau symbols. And I've used one operation already just by saying it's clear. And I said that C of N and T of N, if we add the two, then we get, if we add a theta of 1 and a theta of N, that we get a theta of N. And I didn't prove that or did any arguing for that, why this should be the case. So, we will have to discuss these things. So, how are the Landau symbols related? What is actually allowed? And things like that. So, how can we prove these things? Okay. So, the first thing about Landau symbols is what we should discuss a bit. Is what does an equation mean where a Landau symbol actually shows up? We've actually defined this already last week. What the Landau symbols are and how they're used. Basically, what they mean. So, you hopefully, because now you've done your exercises probably already, you hopefully know what this equation means. Right? What does T of N is theta of N log N mean? Think about the definition of last time. That basically says, right, that you have two constants, C1 and C2. And you can enclose the left-hand side into a constant times the right-hand side from below and from above. So, this is what T of N is equal to theta of N log N means. Right? So, this is a different notation than the usual equality. Right? Because this is not an equality. So, the left-hand side is not really an equality of the right-hand side. But still, we write equals. Okay? So, this is basically an important notational abbreviation that just tells us that this side is enclosed into a multiple of the right-hand side from below and from above. If you remember, we had this big omega and this big O. The big O said that constant times the right-hand side tops the left-hand side. And capital omega means that a constant times the right-hand side is always below the left-hand side. And the theta means that it's above and below. So, that's enclosed. That's asymptotically equal. Okay? If we write down such equalities from left to right, what we can only do is we can make the equality from left to the right-hand side bigger. So, what we can say is we can say something like so we can only enclose the things. And so, what we can do is what is defined? Defined is you can have at most one theta on the left-hand side or one omega or one big O on the left-hand side of an equality sign. And at most one on the right-hand side of an equality sign. Right? Usually. Usually. You cannot write down sums of these things. You can have one on the left-hand side and one on the right-hand side. So, there's only a single anonymous function on every side you can have. Now, in order to make sure that we make, that we understand how to use these things, we need to have a few. Let's call it a proposition. That's not a number that is used in the book. I will call it like this. So, what do these symbols actually, what properties do they have? So, properties of the Landau symbols. Okay. So, in analysis or in the STEOP, did you learn about order relations? Do you know what an order relation is? Small or equal? Yeah? Yeah? An order? Yeah? You learned that? Great. So, the Landau symbols have usually the most important properties of orders. So, they're transitive. So, what does that mean? That means if we have that F of N is capital O of G of N and G of N is capital O of H of N. Both of these are correct then. F of N is also capital O of H of N. And the same is true for omega and theta. So, if F of N is capital O of H of N. So, we have that F of N is capital O of H of N. Then, F of N is capital O of H of N. And the same is true for theta. So, if F of N is capital O of H of N. So, if F of N is capital O of H of N. Then, F of N is capital O of H of N. So, this is true for all the three. This is the transitivity property. The next property is reflexivity. which is even more trivial. So, F of N is capital O of F of N. We have F of N is capital O of F of N. And we have F of N is capital O of F of N. All of them are true. And actually, the first three are the transitivity is also true for the small ones. So, I should have written them also down there. But I write them there. So, F of N, if F of N is small O of G of N. And G of N is small O of H of N. Then, F of N is small O of H of N. And the final one is the small omega. So, F of N is small O of G of N. And G of N is small O of H of N. Then, F of N is small O of H of N. So, this is not true for reflexivity. Functions are not small of themselves. And there is one more important operation which is symmetry. And the symmetry is only true for theta. So, there is symmetry. And this says that if, so F of N, so if F of N is theta of G of N, then G of N is also theta of F of N. So, in theta you can exchange the two sides. So, theta is what we call an equivalence relation in math. And the other ones are some sort of order relations. And, of course, the capital O's and the capital omega's, they can be exchanged. So, there is some sort of exchange symmetry. Exchange. And it says if, F of N is capital O of G of N, then G of N is capital omega of F of N and the other way round. So, if F of N is capital omega of G of N, then G of N is capital O of F of N. So, those are the important properties of the relations. So, let's think how we could prove any of them. Let's prove one of them. Let's take a proof. I will not prove all of them. You might prove a few of them in your exercises classes because I will do one, which is the transitivity relation of the theta. So, let's assume that F of N is capital theta of G of N and G of N is capital theta of H of N. Okay, let's see. Let's try to figure out what that means. I will move this up. So, if this is the case by definition, we know that there exists, then there exists numbers C1 and C2, which are bigger than zero, and an N zero in the natural numbers, such that C1 times G of N is small or equal F of N is small or equal C2 times G of N for all N that are greater or equal to N zero. So, this is the definition of theta between F and G. Now, because G is theta of H of N, there also exists numbers D1 and D2, which are also bigger than zero, and then N1 in the natural numbers, such that D1 times G of N, no, D1 times H of N is small or equal G of N, which is small or equal D2 times H of N for all N that are greater or equal to N1. Now, what do we have to prove? We have to prove that F of N is theta of H of N. So, we need to find two more numbers. Let's call them K1 and K2 that are bigger than zero, and the natural number N2 in N, such that the similar inequality holds. Well, now what should be the numbers? Well, let N2 be the maximum of N0 and N1. So, those are things we are already used from the sequences in analysis. And what are good inequality signs? Well, we need to have something like C1 times G of N, and so, a good idea is to multiply C1 and D1. So, then let's K1 be C1 times D1, and K2 be C2 times D2. Now, what does that mean then? What we get is that K1 times H of N. Well, this is, of course, C1 times D1 times H of N. This is small or equal C1 times G of N, because D1 times H of N is small or equal G of N, and C1 is a non-negative number, so we can multiply this inequality by C1. One, we know that C1 times G of N is small or equal F of N, and we know that F of N is small or equal C2 times G of N. Now, we take this inequality and multiply it by C2. So, this is small or equal C2 times D2 times H of N, which is the same as K2 times H of N. And this is true for all N greater or equal to N2, because these inequalities are true for all N greater or equal N1, and these true for all N greater or equal N0. So, both of them are true if N is greater or equal to maximum of the two. And so, we've shown that for all N greater or equal N2, we have that K1 times H of N is small or equal F of N, which is itself small or equal K2 times H of N. So, that implies by definition that F of N is capital theta of H of N. And so, we have proved one of these relations, one of these transitivity relations. And all the others are very similar. So, you can prove all of them in the same way. Actually, if you only take the upper half, we've proved the capital O inequality. And if you only take the lower half of the inequalities, you've proved the capital omega inequality. So, this is basically some sort of proof for all the three, for omega and theta and capital O. We can prove one of the small O's as well if you want to. So, let's try another one. So, let's assume that F of N is small O of G of N, and G of N is small O of H of N. And we want to show that F of N is small O of H of N. So, what do we know now again by definition? So, for every epsilon bigger than zero, there exists an N zero in N, such that F of N is small or equal epsilon times G of N, such that F of N, is small or equal epsilon times G of N, for all N greater or equal N zero. N one, sorry. So, what do we need to prove that F of N is small O of G of N? So, for every epsilon greater than zero, there exists also N one in N, such that G of N is small or equal epsilon times H of N for all N greater or equal than zero. N one, sorry. So, what do we need to prove? We need to show that for every epsilon, we can have the same inequality between F and H. So, in order to show something that is true for everything, we take an arbitrary one. So, let epsilon be bigger than zero be arbitrary. Okay, what do we need to show? What do we need to show? We need to show, we need to find an N. Two in the natural numbers such that F of N is smaller equal epsilon times H of N for all N. So, what we need to show is greater or equal to N. Okay, now, again as before, we would like to use the chain of inequalities we had, right? So, we would like to have, we know that F of N is smaller or equal than epsilon times G of N. And we know that G of N is smaller or equal than epsilon times H of N. So, what we would like to have, we would like to put the two together. So, what if we put the two together again, like before we multiplied these two things here. So, a good idea would be to start with a square root of epsilon, right? So, since now epsilon is arbitrary, now we take these two things. So, then, for, then we get, we get an N zero in N such that F of N is smaller or equal square root of epsilon times G of N for all N greater or equal to N zero. Right? Right? Because this is true for every epsilon. Since it's true for every epsilon, it's also true for square root of epsilon. And N one in N such that G of N is smaller or equal square root of epsilon times H of N for all N greater or equal to N one. And now let, again, N two be the maximum of N zero and N one. If this is the case, then we have, then if N is greater or equal to N two, we have that F of N is smaller or equal square root of epsilon times G of N. Right? So, if we multiply these two things out, this is epsilon times H of N. And so, F of N is smaller or equal to N. And so, F of N is smaller or equal to epsilon times H of N. Right? So, if we multiply these two things out, this is epsilon times H of N. And so, F of N is smaller or equal to epsilon times H of N. So, F of N is smaller or equal to N. And so, this means that F of N is small O of H of N. So, this means that all of these operations somehow look like inequalities. So, capital O is something, is similar to smaller equal. So, yes? Yeah. Yeah. Yes. No? Okay. You can do it the other way also. Depends on how you do it. It's some sort of style, mathematical style to at the end end up with an epsilon. This is also in analysis. I think you did a lot of proofs where it took epsilon over two and things like that. So, this is just a matter of mathematical style. Yes. Why is it for a little O? We have a second sound for a different . Sorry? I don't, I don't. In the first group, we have different . Yes. Or we have the same epsilon for . Ah, because you mean why I took here epsilon and then there. Yeah. So, this is important because that's the difference, you know? That's an important difference to understand. But here, we have an existence, right? So, the existence says that I need to find specific elements. Okay? So, this C of C1 and C2, those may be different constants than those constants. This is a for all. So, this doesn't matter how I call it because no matter what I put into there, this is for every true. I could also use a delta here and an ether here, but that wouldn't matter because they can be arbitrary, as your colleague said before. So, they are, this is true for every such number. I can plug in every number I like. I can plug in a half. I can plug in one over 10 million. I can plug in 10 to the minus 7,000. It doesn't matter. So, this inequality is true for every epsilon. And for every epsilon, I can get an n0. So, it is important that if I get existence stuff, if something exists, I name them differently. Because these two n's are different. Right? Because if I have the sequence one over n and the sequence one over n squared, it does make a difference on where I'm actually smaller than one over, let's say, 10,000. Right? If I have the sequence one over n, I'm smaller equal one over 10,000 for n greater or equal 10,000. If I have the sequence one over n squared, I'm smaller than one over 10,000 for every n that is greater or equal 100. Yeah? So, these are different. And so, every time when we have something that exists, and if you want to get them, you have to name them differently. And so, this is why here we have something that exists. We have exists a constant C1. We have exists a constant C2. Exists a constant D1. Exists a constant D2. So, whenever you have an existence quantor, you have to specifically find a specific element. Right? So, that's why all of them are named differently here. This is true for everything. And if something is true for everything, then you can call them the same. Because it doesn't matter. Because it's for every. Yeah? So, this is why we can call them the same here. And we cannot call them the same here. We could call them differently if we wanted to, but we don't have to. Right? But here we have to. Welcome. Okay. So, what else do we know about these things? What is also important is if... So, capital O is similar to smaller equal and capital omega is similar to greater equal. And... And... And... And small O is similar to smaller and small omega is similar to bigger. And theta, of course, is similar to equals. And they're not really equal, but it's asymptotically equal. The one is asymptotically smaller equal. The other is asymptotically greater equal. And small O means it's asymptotically smaller. And small omega means it's asymptotically bigger. So, the properties are very similar. So, the properties are very similar. And... What is also important, since they are similar, that you can also combine them. So, um... And this is something you can prove in the exercises class. So, just to get used to this proof. For example, if G of N or if F of N is capital O of G of N. And G of N is small O of H of N. So, how do you combine them? If this is smaller equal this and this is smaller than this, the combination is smaller, right? So, that implies that F of N is small O of H of N. Little O. Little O of... Sorry. It's called little O in English. So, it's little O of H of N. So, that's how you combine them. That's how you can remember them, right? So, a capital O is something like a smaller equal. A capital omega is something like a greater equal. And so, you can also see that you cannot easily combine them different ones, right? So, you can combine a theta and a capital O. Because if the first one is... If F of N is capital O of G of N and G of N is theta of H of N, you also have that F of N is capital O of H of N, right? So, you can combine them as if there were these inequalities you're already used to, right? You cannot combine these two. You cannot combine a smaller equal and a greater equal. But what you can do is you combine a smaller equal and a smaller. You can combine a smaller equal and an equal. You can combine a smaller and an equal and things like that. And all of these relations are true. All of these combinations are true. So, how do these things relate if we use operations like adding and multiplying, right? So, this is the next thing we would like to understand. So, this is proposition 3.2. So, let's assume that... So, if F of N is capital O of G of N and H of N... Or let's call it H of N here. And G of N is also capital O of H of N. The same is true for omegas and thetas as well. So, the same is true for omegas and the same is true for omegas and the same is true for omegas. Then F of N plus G of N is also capital omegas and the same is true for omegas. So, for thetas, why is the same true for thetas? Because we've already seen and this is something we already used in the definition that... Theta is the same as being capital omega and capital O at the same time. So, big O and big omega at the same time. So, therefore, this is also true for theta. So, if F of N is theta of H of N and G of N is theta of H of N... Then F of N plus G of N is theta of H of N. So, addition, adding things up is very similar. So, I really hope that we get on time a useful cleaning stuff. Let me see. at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the Thank you. Let's take it for capital. Okay, shit. I'm sorry. I hope that on time we will get our new cleaning equipment. I was promised that we get one so that these things don't happen. But at the moment I don't have it. So let's look at why this is the case. Let's prove that at least one of them. We do it similar to before. And the same is, by the way, true for small o as well. Right? So this is also true for small o and for little o and for little omega. So all of these things work very well for adding stuff up. And so let's see. So if F of n is capital O of H of n, then there exists a C1 and a C2 bigger than 0 and an N0 in the natural numbers such that... You see we have existence so we need to give them names such that... No, there is only a C1. Such that F of n is small or equal C1 times H of n. Right? So this is the capital O definition. So this is the capital O definition. Right? And if G of n is capital O of H of n, then there exists... There exists a C2 bigger than 0 and then N1 in the natural numbers such that... Such that G of n is small than C2 times H of n for all n greater or equal N1. And now again as before, we define our N2 to be the maximum of N0 and N1. And so, and then we take our C3 or D to be C1 plus C2. And so we get... Which is also bigger than 0 because both of them are bigger than 0. And so we get that F of n plus G of n is smaller or equal to C1 times H of n plus C2 times H of n. Because the G of n is smaller or equal C1 times H of n. The G of n is smaller or equal C2 times H of n. Which is the same as if we factor out the H and use the definition. Which is the same as D times H of n. And this is true for all n greater or equal to N2. Because the first inequality is true for all n greater or equal to N0. The second inequality is true for all n greater or equal to N1. So both are true for all n greater or equal to the maximum of the two which is N2. And so this inequality is what we wanted to prove. So therefore, F of n plus G of n is big O of H of n as well. So let's take this and let's look at an example. A simple one. The one that we had before. So what we did, for example. How did we use it in the analysis of a merge sort? Well, we had that C of n was theta of n. And D of n was theta of 1. Yeah. Well, I did not yet prove that one. Right. So how do we get this one out? Yeah. So I need to prove that one as well. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. So what we had, what did we, it's not yet enough. So in order to give that example, it's not yet enough. What we can do is if C of n is theta of n and D of n is theta of n, that means that C of n plus D of n is also theta of n. But this is not something we had by now. Okay. So let's see what else can we do. How can we improve on our proposition from here in order to get the sum we needed there? So let's see if we have an idea on what we can look at here. So there is another proposition, proposition 3. 3, 2. So let's see if we have an idea of theta of n and G of n is theta of k of n. And then F of n plus G of n is theta of h of n plus k of n. So let's prove that. So let's assume the first two things. So if the first two things are true, then there exists C1, C2 bigger than 0 and then n 0 in the natural numbers. Such that C1 times H of n is smaller than F of n. Is smaller than C2 times H of n for all n greater or equal n 0. And D1 and D2 bigger than 0 and then n 1 in the natural numbers. Such that D1 times k of n is smaller or equal to G of n. Which is smaller or equal to D2 times k of n for all n greater or equal to n 1. So this is the same as before. Now how do we combine the two? So let's write down the combination. Let's see how we get to these inequalities. Now what do we have? We have F of n plus G of n. Now what do we know? We know that F of n plus G of n is smaller or equal C1 times H of n plus D1 times k of n. Ah D2, sorry. And they are greater or equal C1 times H of n plus D1 times k of n, right? So how do we combine these two into a single inequality? Well, what we need to get here, we need to get the smaller of the two constants, right? So this is greater or equal to the minimum of C1 and D1 times H of n plus k of n. And this is smaller or equal to the maximum of C2 and D2 times H of n plus k of n. Because we only make it bigger if we make the constant bigger. And so we can define, so let again n2 be the maximum of n1 and n0. And then we take the other constant. We take the constant, oops, CD, E, yeah. So we take E1 to be the minimum of C1 and D1. And we take E2 to be the maximum of C2 and D2. And so by what we've seen before, so this is our side calculation. So then if, I don't like this. If n is greater or equal to n2, we get that E1 times Hn plus kn is smaller or equal to fn plus g of n is smaller or equal to fn. plus g of n is smaller or equal to e2 times h of n plus k of n. And this, of course, implies that f of n plus g of n is theta of h of n plus k of n. And of course the same proof, the lower half shows the same for big omega and the upper half shows the same for big O. And so we have similar operations here. So if we use this as an example, so what do we have in our merge sort? We have that C of n is theta of n and D of n is theta of 1. And now we can use both of our ideas of before. So that implies by proposition 3, 3, 3, 2. No, this is 3, 3, right? Sorry, this was a wrong number. By proposition 3, 3, this implies that C of n plus D of n is theta of n plus 1, right? Because we can add the two up. This is what we just said. We had theta of h of n and theta of k of n. The first one is an n. The second one is a 1. So the sum of the two is theta of n plus 1. But theta of n plus 1 is the same as theta of n. Because n plus 1 is theta of n, right? n plus 1 is asymptotically equal to n. So we can use our transitivity operation of before and use this for since n plus 1 is theta of n. And by transitivity, so this is true by proposition 3, 1. And so what we see is that in our merge sort, we can get rid of the C of n and theta of n. And so let's go back to our merge. Well, there is one more thing probably which is important. So let's take the final proposition, proposition 3, 4, which is also something we need occasionally. And this says if f of n is. Now, I invent a new notation in order to abbreviate stuff. I call this r of g of n. And r is one of capital O, capital omega, theta, small o and small omega. So any of them. And g of n is r of h of n. And g of n is r of k of n. Then f of n times g of n is the same relation of h of n times k of n. So we can multiply them if we want to as well. So let's prove this as well. And for simplicity, I will prove this for capital O. So assume that f of n is capital O of g of n and h of n, sorry. And g of n is capital O of k of n. So then there exists again, as c 1 bigger than 0 and then n 0 in n such that f of n is smaller or equal c 1 times h of n for all n greater or equal to n 0. And so we do the same thing as before. So let n 2 be the maximum of n 0 and n 1. And d be the product of c 1 and c 2. Then f of n times g of n is smaller or equal. So let n 1 greater or equal to n 1. And so we do the same thing as before. So let n 2 be the maximum of n 0 and n 1. So let n 1 and d be the product of c 1 and c 2. Then f of n times g of n is smaller or equal. Both of these things are non-negative by definition. So this is smaller or equal c 1 times h of n times c 2 times k of n. Which is the same as d times h of n times k of n. And this is true for all n greater or equal to n 2. The same argument as before. And so this implies that f of n times g of n is capital O of h of n times k of n. And the same proofs work for omega and theta and the small omega and small and the little omega and little o proofs are the same. We will do a few of them just for you to get used to proving things like that in the exercises class. And it's probably a good idea to study them because they are possible small proofs for the exam. It's important to understand them and to study them a bit. Okay. Good. Good. So. Now we've learned how to calculate with them. This was important. This was an important thing to study algorithms. So now we can get used to how we can calculate with these things. Right? So why is this important? Because what do we know? If we have, for example, a loop, right? And we know that the number of times the loop runs is theta of n. So it runs theta of n times. And inside the loop, the operations are, let's say, theta of n squared. Then we know that the whole algorithm has theta of n times theta of n squared many operations, which is theta of n cubed many operations. Right? So once we know how to use these lambda symbols and calculate with them, it's quite easy to combine them together in the analysis of an algorithm. And the only thing that is still missing is the analysis of the recursion that we had in the beginning. Right? So first, to get back to where we are in analyzing our merge sort algorithm is we had the following recursion. So we knew that the time it takes for doing a merge sort is theta of 1 if the algorithm is applied to areas of size 1 and it halves the algorithm. It halves the size of the operations but does twice as many, solves twice as many problems and adds a theta of n part for every operation. So now let's figure out how we can solve such recursion. So this is the next chapter, which is chapter 4. And this is basically analyzing divide and conquer algorithms. Sorry? Have some questions? No, we're almost done. It's only two minutes left. No, it's quarter of an hour left. So analyzing divide and conquer algorithms. And that basically all of these divide and conquer algorithms basically have the same structure. And so they all end up with very similar recursive formulas. So, let's try another one that you know from linear algebra, right? From linear algebra, we would like to multiply matrices with each other. Okay, now I will project the simple matrix multiplication operation as you've learned it in linear algebra. So, this is basically the way how we can... I will scroll it down so I don't have to look so far up. Come on. Yeah. Yeah. So, the simple matrix multiplication algorithm just computes for every element in the matrix C. So actually it's a bit better. So you have given a matrix C. And what you want to do is you want to calculate C is equal to C plus A times B. So you have two matrices A and B that you want to multiply. You have given a matrix C and you want to update the matrix C by the product of A times B. So now what you do, you go through every element of C. This is the outer two loops for I equals 1 to N and for J equals 1 to N. So this is the matrix C and then you multiply. You just use the definition. So the definition is that Cij is Cij plus the sum over K equals 1 to N Aik times Bkj. So this was the product. This was the definition of the matrix product. And this is exactly as it is computed inside the loop. And this is for three N times N matrices. So A, B, and C are all real N times N matrices. Actually, the floating point N times N matrices in the computer, but that doesn't matter. Okay, now we can analyze our algorithm, right? So the inner loop, in the innermost loop, we take two operations, which is a product and a sum. And then we have a loop of size N, another loop of size N, and a third loop of size N. So apparently this has theta of N cubed operations, right? This is theta of N cubed operations. So this is quite simple. This is the simple matrix multiplication. And the question is, can we get it faster than that? Can we get an algorithm that multiplies two matrices faster than that? And this is basically the direct approach. Now the question is, can we do some sort of divide and conquer? So how would divide and conquer for matrix multiplication work? Well, let's see. So what could we do? We could take a matrix C and cut it into pieces. Let's cut it into simple pieces like those. Okay, now. Roughly half the size. Okay? So if we cut the matrix into roughly half the size, we get four sub matrices. C1, 1, C1, 2, C2, 1, C2, 2. Okay, now. Let's do the same back there of the right-hand side. So we have C1, 1, C1, 2, C2, 1, C2, 2. Plus, and here we have A times B, which is A1, 1, A1, 2, A2, 1, A2, 2. Times B1, 1, B1, 2, B2, 1, B2, 2. Let's for the moment assume all of these matrices are square so that this was an even number of rows and columns. Now, if we want to multiply them, this is quite simple. So if we calculate this, we have a C1, 1 plus A1, 1 times B1, 1 plus A1, 2 times B2, 1. So here we have C1, 2 plus A1, 1 times B1, 2 plus A1, 2 times B2, 2. Here we have C2, 1 plus A2, 1 times B2, 2 times B2, 2. And here with the final one, we have C2, 2 plus A2, 1 times B1, 2 plus A2, 2 times B2, 2. So this is the new product. So this is what we need to calculate in order to produce the result after cutting into pieces. Okay, so this is a simple divide and conquer algorithm. I'm just checking whether it's written down somewhere. There it is. Okay, so this is what we do. Now, let's see how this algorithm works. Well, it produces what we wanted. So it takes our two matrices A and B here and our resulting matrix C that is pre-produced. And now what do we need? Well, if we have one by one matrices, this is simple because we just take the number and add the product of these two numbers. Those are only numbers. So this is the first part. At the end of the recursion, if we have a one by one matrix, this is just the sum plus a product of two numbers. And otherwise, we need to partition the matrix into sub matrices, into these four sub matrices written down. And then we need to multiply the matrices as we do. So we need to add to C11A11 times B11 and we need to add to C11A12 times B21. This is line 8 and line 12 respectively. Right? Adding to C11 the A11 times B11 and adding to C11 the A12 times B21. Right? So this is the lines 8 and 12. Now, this calculates the first part up there. The part down there, the C12, is multiplied also in two lines. It's in line 9 and line 13. If you compare the two formulas. Then we combine line 10 and line 14 to calculate this part. And finally, we take line 11 and line 15 to calculate this part. And then we're finished. And so let's figure out what the recursion for that operation would be. Now, we know that the time for multiplying two n times n matrices, again, is a recursion. So for n equals to 1, we have theta of 1 as before. So for n equals to 1. And if n is bigger than 1, what do we have to do? Well, we get basically the base, the divide operation. Well, doing the divide operation properly is not so simple. Right? So we need to somehow cut the matrix into pieces. Usually we don't have to do this explicitly. The only thing with what we need to do is we need to access the proper parts of the matrices. So we don't need to really take them and copy them somewhere. Because we only update our matrix C11. So this can be done by index operations. This is only big array. And we only have to think about where to put our operations. And so we don't really need to copy anything there. The only thing is we need to calculate stuff. So if we do proper index operations, we only have to calculate stuff. Which means that the whole divide operation is a theta of 1. Because we only need to do index calculations and they're always the same. And then we have eight sub-problems, as we can see. So we have eight times T. The size is n half. And then we have a theta of 1 for the divide and conquer operations. So this is the recursive part of our operations. So as you can see, it's very similar to what we had before. So before we had the sum of these two things that were thetas of something. And then we had a recursion. Right? So the only thing that changes is here we have half the size of the problems. But we have eight of them. And not two of them as with the merge sort. So the interesting question is, what will t of n be? Will it be any faster? Will it be slower? What will happen? And we will see very soon that t of n is theta of n cubed. Which is basically the same. So as you can see, if you do divide and conquer, it's not always faster than if you take the direct approach. For sort it was. For sort, we could go from n squared operations in our insertion sort down to n log n operations binary. For the simple divide and conquer approach for matrix multiplication, it doesn't change a lot. Because the direct algorithm had theta of n cubed. And the subdivided, the divide and conquer algorithm also had theta of n cubed. So how we calculate this is something we will do tomorrow. So tomorrow we'll start how to solve these problems. And we will have three approaches. One of them is important, which is the so-called master theorem. The master theorem solves all of these recursions by some analytic steps. So the question for a very long time was whether it is actually possible to get an operation, to get a method that solves the matrix multiplication problem faster than in order of n cubed. And this is something we will very shortly discuss also tomorrow. There is Strassen's algorithm. There is a method that has t of n equal to theta of n to the log, to the binary log of 7. Which is faster than, because the binary log of 7 is 2.80 something. So which is theta of n to the 2.81 approximately. So it can be done faster. And we will discuss it a bit tomorrow. So the idea is not to do it simple like that. We will still subdivide it the same way, but we do not calculate the result in the same way. So the idea is to calculate 10 products of that sizes and copy a few sub-matrices and then add them together properly. So that here, instead of the 8 in front of this thing, we get the 7. And instead of the theta of 1, we get the theta of n squared. So the other things adding up together gives us something like n to the log of 7. And why this is the case is also something we will discuss tomorrow. And so I wish you a nice afternoon. See you again tomorrow at 9.45 in the other lecture room. at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at 9 at
