So welcome back to the lecture course. As I said yesterday, today we're going to start to discuss more algorithmic things. And so we've also done algorithms before, but they were always in connection to data structure, like manipulating the data structure. Today, we're going to take a look at a very, very important part of data science, which is optimization. So what is optimization about? So some of you might have had some optimization problems already at school. So at least in former times, there were problems like you have a, I know, triangular lot of land and you want to build the largest possible rectangular house on it. Or you have, you want to make a can. And for the can, of course, you need to get metal for the base, for the ceiling, for the top of the can and for the can itself. The question is, for example, what are the relative sizes of the height with respect to the radius so that the amount of material you use for the can is minimal, things like that. So often it's cool you learn such problems, you learn to solve such problems. And all of these are subsumed under the mathematical term of optimization problems. Okay, so optimization problems usually come in several flavors, as to say. And I always love to say that optimization, of course, I'm researching optimization. So most of the people you meet in the Maths Institute will tell you that their subject is the most important one. So mine is, which is optimization, which is optimization, and I can tell you why it is. Well, everybody of you is solving an optimization problem every day, right? So life is an optimization problem. And the first thing you learn relatively soon in life is that you cannot do everything. So you have some constraints to satisfy, right? You have to have a budget constraints, right? The amount of money for most of you is not unlimited. So you have some budget constraints. Then you have other constraints like where you can go, where you cannot go, and things like that. So it's quite soon that you learn what your constraints are. In life, the most difficult thing is to decide what the objective function is. So what are you optimizing for, right? Optimizing for having the maximal amount of money. There's definitely people who do that. Optimizing for having the maximum amount of luck or happiness, whatever that means. But usually you choose some sort of objective function. You want to achieve something best possible. And then you have constraints. And this is what optimization is about in Maths. So you have an objective function that tells you some sort of valuation of what you're just doing. You have variables. The variables are the things you can influence, right? Then you have constants. Those are the things you can't influence, at least not easily. And then there are the constraints that restrict what you can choose as variables, right? You can say that, I don't know, this is your favorite place. But if somebody else is sitting there, you likely won't push him aside just to sit there. So this is a constraint, right? And constraints can change throughout life. And this is also true for optimization problems. And optimization problems are basically everywhere. If you're doing data science, store the data in an optimal fashion, get the optimal information out of the data, or even solve optimization problems for the companies you're working with. So, and if you do that, you first build a mathematical model of that optimization problem, right? You have to write down a mathematical function that tells you what is good, what is bad, which one's better. So you have to assign a value to every solution that you have, right? So every choice of variables, usually, of the things you can influence will have a value at the end. And you either want to maximize or minimize that value, depending on whether you are talking about revenue, then the company usually wants to maximize it. If you want to talk about, I don't know, impact on ecology, then probably you want to minimize the impact. So whether you want to minimize something or maximize something is usually dependent on the application that we're talking about. And then you also have to put your constraints into mathematical functions, right? So let's take a simple example. If you want to paint the map of countries, then usually there is the topographical map that tells you how high something is or how low something is. But there is also the political maps that paint in colors the countries that you're actually, so that you can distinguish the countries at first glance. And this has usually a constraint that means that you won't color two countries that are not the same, but share a border. You will not color them in the same color, right? So you have to choose different colors to make this a useful political map. So this is a constraint, of course, right? That tells you if two countries are adjacent to each other, the colors have to be different. This is a sort of constraint. Now, everything clear by now. So usually what you're doing, you're writing down an optimization problem as an optimization direction. And mathematicians usually minimize something. Why ever? But this is a choice. And if you want to compare things, you have to have a totally ordered set of values, right? And usually we just use the real numbers as values. And then minimization and maximization are basically the same. So if you want to maximize something, you can minimize negative the objective function. Then you have just the other way around. So transforming minimization problems into maximization problems and the other way around usually is quite simple. And then you have constraints. And constraints are usually written down with st. St means subject to. So with the constraint of something. And then you have other functions like g of x, maybe small or equal to 0. H of x, maybe is equal to 0. So you have equality and inequality constraints. So f is usually a map from rn to r. And g is usually a map from rn to rm. And this small or equal means every component has to be small or equal to m. Right? So this is the same as saying that g of x, the i-th component of x is small or equal to 0 for all i equals 1 to m. Right? So if you have a map that maps rn to rn, then it has m component maps. The one that maps to the first component of rm, the one that maps to the second component of rm. And this inequality sign means that all of them have to be small or equal to 0. For equality, this is simple. So you usually have rn to, let's say, rr. It doesn't make a difference. So these are the, as we call them, usually continuous constraints. Now, what is also very, very frequent is you don't have only continuous things. Like if you want to produce cars, you want to produce 7.79 cars. This is very unlikely. So you usually want to produce whole cars or cars, not at all. Which means that some of these variables, like the number of cars, will have an integer component. Right? So some of them will be in the integers. And so what we usually say that x i is in set for i in some set i. So that means that some of the variables will have to be integer. And actually, if we get discrete now, sometimes you don't choose among integers. So if you want to buy an airplane, right? Like we're in Europe. So let's take a European airplane, an Airbus. Let's say you want to buy an Airbus A320, which means you have to have some money left. A bit. Then you can choose among several options, right? So you can get, if it's your private jet, you want to probably want to have the shortest one, which is called A319, I think. If you're shuffling people around, then probably want to have a larger one, like an A321 or something like that. So this is a choice. You can choose the size. This is one choice. The second choice is you can choose the engine option, right? You either want, I think there's Rolls-Royce engines or Pratt & Whitney engines or something like that. So you might want to choose any of those. But they are not one and two, right? So sorting them like integers are sorted doesn't make a lot of sense for these things. Probably for the size of the Airbus, it doesn't make sense because an A319 is smaller than an A320. But a Pratt & Whitney engine is a Pratt & Whitney engine. It's not necessarily smaller than a Rolls-Royce engine, right? So there's no comparison among them, which means that some of the variables, and I don't write this down now. Some of the variables will not be real numbers or integer numbers. Some of the variables will just be elements of some finite set, right? You have some choices. The same is true if you want to build an interplanetary vehicle like, I don't know, Voyager 3, if it will ever be sent out. And then you also have options, right? Which kind of antenna you put in. So all of these things are, as we call, categorical variables. So you just choose them among a finite set. But at the end, you have to do something. So you know what the thrust is of this engine. You know what, I don't know, the amount of fuel it burns and things like that. So those are influences that you get in the other constraints because you can choose whatever you like. But if you want to go to Pluto, you better end up there, right? So if you choose an engine that won't get you there, then it's probably not a good choice, right? So you choose an engine and check whether the fuel you can put in will actually get you to Pluto in the end. And you have other things like the day when you start. Well, this is more or less a continuous variable, right? So time is more or less continuous, at least in the first approximation. And then the flying path through our solar system is also more or less continuous, right? So at the end, it's a differential equation that tells you where you get at the end once you start. And then you have to burn some things when you pass, I don't know, Jupiter, because otherwise you will never reach Pluto in time. So all these things are some things to consider. But all of these things are optimization problem, right? You want to design your vehicle with as low as price as possible, but with as high as reliability as possible, because you want, I don't know what this costs, but maybe a few hundred million euros. So if you want to go there, so it's very likely that you don't want to spend this and have the spaceship fail after passing Mars, right? Or we were there before, but it's not a good idea to do that. So all of these things amounts together to getting you an optimization problem, right? And optimization problems, solving optimization problems can be simple, but it can be notoriously hard. And you will meet a few of them while you're walking through your curriculum. So we will now start with simple ones and we will learn a simple way to solve some of these optimization problems. And we will do discrete optimization problems first. Don't ask me why. Well, yeah, the point is because they fit to algorithms and data structures. The continuous ones like these more or less fit to analysis. So they use lots of analytical methods, while the discrete ones more or less use algorithmic methods, discrete algorithmic methods. The reason is that solving discrete optimization problems is notoriously harder than usually than solving continuous ones. And the reason is that something we will meet when we talk about the first example now. Okay, so what is the example? And it's a simple one. It's a simple one to state. It's a very unrealistic one. But there are some problems that are very like this one, which are actually real. So it's in the book, so you can read it also there. I still take it because it's a nice example. And actually I had a very similar one, a relative of this one, which is a bit harder. And we will talk about this later. So let's assume that you are a company. And I will not take steel rods, but something like that, which is real. So just think you're a company that produces modern versions of these things. Okay. So these are, of course, very old. And they have been, I think, done by a smith. So they are probably half hand and half machine done or something like that. But they are from the 1800s. So the modern ones you've probably seen in many of the buildings usually are from aluminum. And they have very regular vertical pieces. And then they have horizontal pieces. And depending on whether the stairs or the, maybe you're running around along a slope, right? Not along stairs, because stairs are very regular. They have a more or less fixed slope, right? So it's very simple to know which lengths here you need, because all of them will be the same. Unless you're on the top in a house where these things change for a short time and then they become the same again. But if you're along a slope, like on a mountain hill, and you want to put a gate or something like there, then the slope changes. And so the length of these things change, because usually you want to have this more or less straight, at least for some time. Okay, so that means what you do, usually they usually come in colors. And if they come in colors, they are usually produced by coloring the aluminum before. They're not usually painted, but they're already colored when they come. And what you have to do if you want to build these things, you have to buy these aluminum parts in large pieces, like let's say six meters in length. And then you need to cut out the smaller things you need, right? You just cut them into pieces so that you have all of these lengths that you require. And you usually have two different kinds of rods, the ones for the vertical ones and the ones for the horizontal ones. But you usually buy them in large pieces. And if you buy them in large pieces, you know in advance which of the lengths you need, right? And then you have the problem of how to optimally cut the lengths of the pieces you need from the six meter long things. Because usually they don't fit perfectly, right? So you always have some leftovers at the end, right? And you have to buy the leftovers from the company that delivers the rods to you, but you can't sell the leftovers. Because you basically have to throw them in the bin. So all the leftovers you have actually go on your price, right? So you pay for the leftovers and not the customer. And so, of course, what you want to do is you want to minimize the leftovers. And of course, you not only want to minimize the leftovers because you're anxious about your revenue, but of course also because you don't want to dump stuff into the environment. That's usually the stuff that drives all of the companies first, of course, as they tell us. It's never about revenue. It's always about the environment. But fortunately, in that case, it's the same, right? So the one implies the other way around. Okay, anyway. So we will do a simpler version now. So what we are doing is we're buying rods. And then we cut the rods into pieces. And we sell the pieces. Like you're going in, I don't know, one of these shops where you can buy stuff to make things for yourself. Like Bauhaus in Austria, where you or any of the others, Obi or I don't want to do too much. Or Vetter. So I have to Hornbach. So now I've probably counted all of them. So it doesn't come in as an advertisement. So they sell you also stuff, right? And they seldom sell you six meter long stuff. They usually, if you want to buy aluminum parts there, they come in, I don't know, two meters, one meter, maybe some of them two and a half meters or something. But that's it. Why? Because they cannot put all of these six meter long things into their buildings. And actually nobody would buy them, right? If you're going there using an ordinary car, you probably wouldn't get six meter long rod and transport it home. So they have to cut these six meter long rods into parts. And then they have to assign a price to all of these things. And as you've seen, likely the two meter long does not cost twice as much as the one meter long. The prices are significantly different. And so what you have is you have rods, right? You have rods of some length. Let's call this length L. So this is the original rod. And L is an integer, which is usually the case because the integer could be something like an integer. It's very seldom that you can order rods that are six meters and 317 millimeters long. So usually you get them in six meters or in six meters 50 or in five meters. But that's it, right? So that's what the people will send to you. And then you cut them into pieces. And you also will not sell your customers pieces that are 93.5 centimeters long. So usually you will send them one meter or two or half a meter, but some also integer things. So what we have is a table now. And the table tells us if we have a length of the piece. Let's call it P the piece length. Piece length. And we have a table. Table. That goes from piece length to C. Let's call it C because piece and price start with the same letter. So let's call C is the price, which is the cost for the customer. So price of selling a piece of length P. Right. So now. And this is where the simplification starts. Now you want to figure out how to cut your rod optimally. Right. So you want to have the maximal revenue from your pieces that you cut out of a single rod. Okay. You can cut many pieces out of a single rod and by for simplicity, we just assume that the cut is zero millimeters wide, which is also not true in reality. But it makes things simpler now. So we can just cut these things into pieces. And what we want to do is we cut. We cut. We cut L. The length into pieces. Let's say P1. To Pn. What shall happen. So all the P's are also integers. The costs are not necessarily integers because as you see, when you go to the shop, costs rarely are integers. For some reason, they tend to end in .90 or in .95 or something like that. So they're definitely not integers. And so if you cut them into pieces, what you want to have is, of course, that the sum P1 plus Pn should be the whole length. We don't want any leftovers. So we are super environmentally friendly. We have no leftovers at all. So we cut them into pieces. And what do we want to have? We want to have that the price of selling is maximal. So we want to maximize cost one plus cost N, where the cost one is the cost of the price of the piece P1. Right? So this is what we want to do. Since however we cut, the price of buying the rod will stay the same. We don't have to care about how much the price of L is. Because we will have to pay the price of L anyway. No matter how we cut it. Okay? Right. So let's think about how we could solve that problem. Okay. So the first thing is, first thing, first of all, what comes to mind first? What comes to mind first is, of course, for cutting a piece. It doesn't make a difference whether you cut the shortest out first and you cut the longest out last. Or whether you cut the longest first and a short one and another long one, they still end up the same thing. So this is a commutative operation and associative as well. So it doesn't make a difference. So without loss of generality, all the cuts will be in ascending length. Right? So we cut the shortest first and we get longer and longer until we hit the end. Okay. So without loss of generality, we can assume that. So the first thing that comes to mind is, we have L and we could do all the possible cuts. Right? So we could think about all the possibilities how to cut this large rod. Let's take an example. Let's say L is 4. Or, yeah, let's say L is 4. Or let me see what was L there. Was it 5? No, it was 4. It's right. So L is 4. So let's see L is 4. Now, how could we cut it? Well, we could cut it in one piece only so we can keep it as 4. Right? So this is the first one. So we have a length 4, which is the only one. Okay. Then we can cut it into a 1 and a 3. Or a 3 and a 1 if we wanted to. Right? So those are the same. But we still write them down. Okay. So that's the maximal length of 3. Now, the next thing would be the maximal length of 2. Well, what could we do? We could cut it in two 2s. Right? So a 2 and another 2. This is a possibility. Then we could cut the second 2 into 1s. Right? So we could cut it into 2, 1, 1, into 1, 2, 1, and into 1, 1, 2. Right? So those are the possibilities to cut when the largest thing in there has length 2. And then those are all. Right? So if we cut any of them, the rest will be 2. So we cut the rest into 2 things. And then we have one more possibility, which is to keep all of them length 1. Right? So which is we can get a 1, 1, 1, 1. Okay. And now what we could do is we could calculate the revenue of that. Right? So we could calculate what everything would give us in sale. So I can write down the table that is in the book. Let me see what is the table. The table is we only need the 1, the 2, the 3, and the 4. So the prices, so the cost and the length will be for a 1, a 2, a 3, and a 4. This will be 1, 5, 8, and 9. Okay. So let's see. So is this realistic? Well, yeah, somewhat because 2-meter-long pieces will be going quite regularly because everybody can fit them in the class. You need to have a large car if you get the 3-meter-long piece. And the 4-meter-long pieces won't sell very high because nobody will take them. They will stand around in your thing because nobody will fit them anywhere unless they have a truck. And so let's see what the revenue in all of these cases is. Well, for the length 4, the revenue is 9. This is something we know. So for the length 1 and the length 3, the revenue is also 9, which is 1 plus 8 is 9. This is also a 9. The 2 and the 2 will be a 10 because we sell 2 for the price 5. And then we have a 2, which is a 5 and 2 ones. This is 7. So this is 7 and this is 7. And 4 ones are 4. So we can see what the best thing would be. It's just cutting all the pieces, all the things that we buy in half and selling 2-meter-long pieces to everybody. Right. So this would be the best revenue for us. Okay. Now let's think how much work this algorithm is. Okay. Who wants to try the same thing for length 10? Who has an idea on how many things you would have to calculate if you want to do this for length 10? Just an estimate. Is it more than 100? Do you have to write down more than 100 of these problems? Okay. Who thinks that it's more than 100? Okay. Let's take the next guess. Who thinks that it's more than 500? Only one. Two. Three. Four. Five. Six. Okay. Seven. Who thinks it's more than 1,000? One. Two. Three. Four. Who thinks it's more than 10,000? Nobody. How many are these? More than 2,000? Nobody wants more than 2,000. So how many are it? Well, here we have length four. And length four have eight pieces. So how could you estimate that? Well, the idea is, of course, you will have to do cuts. Right? You'll have to do cuts. And you have nine places where to cut if the rod has length 10. Right? You have nine places where to cut. And for all of these places, you can choose to cut or not to cut. Which is two choices at nine positions. Which at the end is two to the nine possibilities. Which are 512. So it's 512 possibilities that you would have to write down. Many of them will not be. So it's more than 500, but less than 1,000. So 512 possibilities for nine. For a length 10 thing. That means if the length is L, the number of cuts you have to consider is 2 to the L minus 1. Which is an exponential effort. So if you do 11, then you double the amount of work you have to do. If you do 12, you again double the amount of work. And you will never, ever, ever finish that stuff if you have length 50. Never, ever. Because 2 to the 50 is already a lot. Even if the calculation takes almost no time. That means that this is probably not a good idea to solve that problem. Right? Okay. Let's think about the new idea. We've already seen that if we cut something in the beginning, then we don't. So this and this are the same. And this and this and this are also the same. Right? So let's think about the recursive procedure to do it. Okay? So what could we do? So why? Why? If I cut the rod at the first place, if I cut it at the first place, then what happens is here I have a piece of length 1 and here I have a piece of length 9 left. Right? So what is the best I can get from revenue if I decide to cut my rod at the first place? What is the best, the absolutely best I can get? Well, let's look. This has been cut at point 1. This has been cut at point 1. This has been cut at point 1. And this has been cut after the first thing. Right? And so when we ever do the first cut, we can get this as the best one. Right? Because this has 9. All the others have 7. But if we look closely at what we can do for length 3, which happens, or not length 9. Sorry. We have 4. This is length 3 is left. All right? So if we look at what is best for length 3, it's either 3 or 2-1 or 1-2 or 1-1-1. Right? So it's either 3 for those or it's 6 for those or it's 8 for those. Right? So if we have 3, let's do this for length 3. If length is 3, we have the possibility to cut in 3. We have the possibility to cut in 2-1, in 1-2, and in 1-1-1. And that's 4. And that's enough because 2 to the 2 is 4. Right? And this has 8. This has 6. This has 6. And this has 3. So this one will give us a revenue of 1. And cutting this in pieces, the best what we can get is a revenue of 8. And so the best we can get when we cut the first is altogether 9, which is the best that we could find there. Right? So a problem that has these properties called subproblem optimal. So whenever we take a subproblem, then we can optimally solve the subproblem. And this gives us information. We don't have to consider the other things that are not optimal for the subproblem. Right? Because they won't be optimal either. Because if we have decided to cut the first thing, then we only have to find the optimal for the rest. Okay, great. Now, what is the first decision we have to face? The first decision we have to face is we have to make the first cut somewhere. Okay. So let's think about the following recursion. So the first thing is we do a cut. And if we do any cut at position K, then we have two pieces left, like the piece from 1 to K and the piece from K plus 1 or the piece from K to the end. Right? So let's think about optimal cut. Or let's see. I'll copy it from the book. I think it's somewhere. Yeah. So it's called cut rod. So let's call it cut rod. Cut rod. And cut rod takes a price table or a cost table. Let's call it C for the cost. And it takes a length L. And of course, if the length is zero, then we return zero because if we don't have a rod, we won't make any revenue. Okay, great. Then we will set Q to infinity or minus one or minus infinity, whatever we like. It doesn't matter. And then we're doing the following thing. We're going through the whole length. So we are cutting our rod from 1 to N. So we're going from 1 to N. And so we're cutting it either at position 1 or at position 2. If we cut it at position N, that means we don't cut it at all. Right? Okay. So let's see. What is Q? So Q is then the maximum of the old Q that we had before and the price of a piece, also the cost, the price of a piece of length K because that's what we cut off in the beginning. And then the rest that remains is a piece of price of length N minus K. Right? So we add cut rod of the price table and the length minus K. And at the end, we will just return what we found. So we return Q. Right? So we have to find the maximum of all the possible cuts. So we cut with at the first piece and calculate what the rest will get us. Then we cut at the second place. We calculate what the rest will get us. Then we cut at the third place, calculate what the rest will get us. And then at the end, we will cut not at all. So we have only the whole rod. And the maximum of all of these revenues will be the revenue that we get from our long piece. Okay. Great. Now, this is basically what we thought about when we envisioned our idea. Right? So this solves many problems at the same time. So it will start with cuts. We cut away the first piece and then we think about what is the rest? What's the value of the rest? Right? Okay. Great. Now, how fast is this algorithm? Who would have done it that way? Just. Because this is often the first thing you think about. Right? So how fast is this algorithm? Yes? Ah, good question. So N squared is the first idea. Shall we try a bit for rods? Let's see. Let's see what we do. So, let's take length equals to, I don't know, five. I think that's few enough. Okay. So the first thing, we do cut rod with five. Right. So what is cut rod with five? We start with length one. So the first thing is we have to calculate one plus I call it cut rod of length four. Right? So this is the first thing we do. Okay. Which means we call cut rod of length four, which says now we start with the first thing, which is again a one. And we call cut rod of length three. Hmm? And then for computing that, we start with another one and compute cut rod of length two. And for that one, we compute another one and compute cut rod of length one. And for that one, we compute another one and compute cut rod of length zero, which is zero. And so we finished in that one. Right? So this is the first iteration. So then one has only one possibility, which is one. But for two, we have another possibility. Right? So we have two plus cut rod of length zero, which is zero. So we stop there as well. So that finishes the cut rod of, oh, sorry. Cut rod of two. This is, okay, this is this one. Right? Okay, now let's see what three does. The next thing about three is a two. For the two, we add the rest, this cut rod of length one. Right? So cut rod of length one is telling us we have a one plus cut rod of length zero, which is okay. So we finished there. Right? And then we have a third one for cut rod three. So for cut rod three, let's continue down there. We have three plus cut rod of length zero and then we finish the three. Now we're going to the four and the four tells us the next thing we have two. We have two plus cut rod of length two. Okay? So cut rod of length two is giving us a one plus cut rod of length one. Cut rod of length one is giving us a one plus cut rod of length zero. Then we have another one which is a two plus cut rod of length zero. Right? And then we have the three left for four which is three. Three plus cut rod of length one and this is a one plus cut rod of length zero which is what we've done. And then we have a 4 left, which is 4 plus cut rod of length 0. And since we have 5, now we start with 2, which has we have 2 plus cut rod of length 3. Well, cut rod of length 3 is basically all of this block again. And then we have 3 plus cut rod of length 2, which adds this block again. And then we have 4 plus cut rod of length 1, which adds this block again. And then we have 5 plus cut rod of length 0, which basically doubles the whole thing again. Right? So this is less than optimal in some sense, right? We could write this down as a graph if we want. So if we start with our 5, we can write this as a 3. So the 5 is being split into a 1, into a 2, into a 3, and into a 4. Right? So if we call a 5, we have a 1 and a 1, and a 1, which I forgot. Right? So actually, the other way around, I'm sorry. So this is a 4. This is a 3. This is a 2. This is a 1. And this is a 0. Right? So those are the children of 5. So if we call cut rod of 5, we have a 1 and have as a child a 4. Then we have a 2 and a child as a child a 3. A 3 and as a child a 2. A 4 and a child as 1. And a 5 and a child as 0. Right? Okay. So now we are at 4. And the 4 splits up in four things, which has a 3, which has a 2, which has a 1, and it has a 0. The 3 is going down to a 2, a 1, and a 0. And the 2 is going to a 1, and a 0. And the 1 is going to a 0. Right? So then we have the 3. The 3 is splitting up into a 2, a 1, and a 0. The 2 is splitting up into a 1, and a 0. And the 1 is going to a 0. Then here we have a 2 that is splitting up into a 1, and a 0. And the 1 is becoming a 0, and the 1 is becoming a 0. Oops. So we are almost finished, because the 2 is a 1, and a 0. The 1 is only a 0. There is another 1, which is a 0. There is another 1, which is a 0. And then we have the 1, which is a 0. And this is the complete recursion tree when we call cut-road 5. Those are all the recursions we have to do. And apparently, what is obvious is this is large. This is a lot. And it's quite simple to show that this is exponential again. Why is it exponential? Because it basically enumerates everything we have up there. Right. Because we enumerate everything that starts with a segment of size 1. We get all of them. Then we get everything that starts with a segment of size 2, everything that starts with a segment of size 3. So even if we thought about these things, this still is getting an exponentially large thing. So it's also 2 to the power of n. It's very clever. It's very recursive. But still, it's 2 to the power of l minus 1 at the end, if l is the size. And you can count the zeros. It's just obvious. Okay. Great. Now, this is nice, but not so nice. Because what is obvious here, if you look at it closely, is that we have calculated the subtree of 3 twice. We've calculated the subtree of 2, 1, 2, 3, 4 times. Right. And I want to count the 8 times where we calculated the subtree of 1. And the subtree of 0 is also a lot. Right. And so, we have done a lot of computations many times in a row, of which we, in principle, would know the result already, if we would have been clever enough to remember it. Right. So, if we would have been clever enough to remember what the result of the 3 was, we wouldn't have to have to traverse that 3. We could have just substituted the result. Right. The same is true for the 2. Because in reality, we only know, we only need to know the results of 5 things, which is the 0, the 1, the 2, the 3, and the 4. Nothing else. Because that's at the end, well, of course, of the 5 as well. if we want to count the 5, but for calculating everything, we only need to know these 5 results. So, the point is, we can do much better. We can do, if we organize our calculation better, we can do much better. Right. So, now we have 2 possibilities to organize these things. The first thing, so, and then basically, the 2 methods are called top-down and bottom-up. And top-down works by memoizing. It's not memo-rising, it's memoizing, which means adding memory to your algorithm. And so, how could we add memory to our algorithm? Let's look at this cut-road thing again. So, what we can do is we can memoize our cut-road, which is memoize cut-road. And of course, this comes again with our prices and with the length that we start with. Okay. So, this works as a recursion with a helper function. and the helper function is only there to actually initialize an array. So, we have a new array. Let's, so, R0 to R0 to L is L plus one times minus infinity. It's just a shortcut for what is written in the book, right? So, we just initialize the whole array with minus infinity. Why minus infinity? Because this tells us whether we've already calculated something or not because prices are not negative. And then we call another function which is return and I will call it memoized cut wrote aux. The auxiliary function where you pass C, L, and R. So, all of the three things and then let's see what memoized cut wrote auxiliary is doing with our three elements. Well, the first thing, of course, is it figures out whether we already know for length L what the result is and this tells us if R of L is greater or equal to zero then return R of L. That's just if we've already calculated it, just let's give back what the result is and then we're doing the same as before basically. so if L is zero we will return zero but we do not yet return it but we just remember what we want to return. So we set an intermediate variable to zero else we set Q to minus infinity and then we produce our loop as before so we just go through all the possible cuts so for K equals one to L do Q is the maximum of Q and the piece price of length K plus the memoized cut wrote aux off well we do know that we still have the same prices we have L minus K as the length we still have the same array and then we need to remember after our loop we need to remember that R of L is equal to Q well at the end I said so we have an if and end for the if and then we at the end I just continue here we set that R of L is equal to Q and then we return Q okay nice so what is this thing doing well let's take the tree up there and let's check what it's actually doing well so it definitely starts with the same thing so it starts with the 4 the 4 has not yet been calculated so it will go to the 3 next the 3 has not yet been calculated so it will go to the 2 then it will go to the 1 then it will go to the 0 but that tells you that now we have R 0 filled we have R of 1 filled we have R of 2 filled and we have R of 3 filled right so in principle so here we have R of 1 filled in R of 2 we have R of 1 already filled so we don't have to go down this tree because we already know what the result of 0 is so we get R of 2 immediately and then the next sibling of 3 is the 1 but the 1 is already filled so we don't have to traverse the tree so we were here we were here we were here we were here we were here but basically okay we are going there and only return we are going there and only return we are going there and only return for the 2 right no we don't even go to the 2 because we only go there and return because we know 2 already right so this is the 1 we know 1 already so we just going there but only return we know 0 already so we going there just return and then we are going there but we know 3 already because we remember 3 we also have 4 now so we go there return we go there return we go there return and that's it so we've only visited the red part of the tree but we've cut away all the white part of the tree okay let's think how much work is it now it doesn't look so impressive because the tree is quite shallow still it's only five depth but so what do we have to do we have to visit everything starting from L to the to the bottom right so we have to visit everything which means we are definitely linear there at least right in L and then what do we have to do we actually have to visit for for five we have to visit four notes for four we have to visit no for five we have to visit five notes for four we have to visit four notes for three we have to visit three notes for notes and for zero as well which means that we have to visit five of five plus four plus three plus two plus one plus zero which doesn't matter notes right which is n times n minus one over two because it's an arithmetic series meaning that we have an order of n squared so it's an order of n squared as opposed to an order of two to the n which is that it's quadratic if you do it better but it's exponential if you do it bad so that's how memorizing things work okay but we could have done it also in another way because we know the structure of the problem and what does the structure of the problem tell us well actually we don't even need the recursion at all why because well what we don't what we know if we want to solve the problem of size five we definitely need to solve the problems of size zero of size one of size two of size three and of size four so what we could do is we could just start with the sizes that are smaller so we could just start an iteration that tells us well first solve the size zero problem which is zero then solve size two problem then you solve the size three problem then solve the size four problem and then you get the size five problem so you can do it and this is the bottom up so top down means you start on the top and going down that's the top down approach the bottom up approach tells you well I just start from here and go up there because I know that this is the sequence that I need to do and I will clean that away and after cleaning that away we will write oh the thing is gone where is it oh yeah thanks but that's only half of the stuff I need where's the other stuff they want to actually get rid of the water do you also see it somewhere no this is why the math institute hates to bring their stuff to other areas because we are always actually buying these things for us because it's much better to clean the black board using one of these however they always come in two parts and whenever we go somewhere else with our stuff you can be 100% sure that some of the other people who are working in the other departments find these things very useful and let's say borrow them for an unspecified amount of time okay let's see okay great now what's bottom up doing well bottom up is basically initializing a new array it's just we just bottom up cut road and of course this is also passed the length and the cost vector and of course we produce a new array so let's r of 0 to n a new array and then as I said we just produce a loop so we set r of 0 to 0 which is known and then we produce our loop for j which is the length of the problem being 1 to n do and then we just use the same iteration as before we set our q to minus infinity and then we go through all the possible cuts so for k equals 1 to j do because we want to solve the problem of size j and then we produce q is the maximum of q and the cut of size k plus the cut rod plus r of length j minus k which is something we've already calculated before and this is what we do and then we assign r j to q and that's it which is doing an iteration now a double iteration and since it's a double iteration it's also order of n squared so that's basically visiting the same nodes you could even do better than that if you wanted to so why could you do better well the point is you could remember what you cut before and only start with larger pieces later the same or larger pieces you would have to cut the smaller first which would accelerate things a bit but not really up to perfection so it will be still theta n squared but this is the idea and the approach that we took now in order to solve this optimization problem that has a name and it's called dynamic programming and the important thing about the word programming in dynamic programming is that it is not about proper programming a program not about implementing a program so in the English speaking word optimization solving optimization problems is called programming the reason is solving optimization problems first algorithmically was basically invented for the American military military so in the 60s no it was in the wait was in the 40s I think it was in the 50s late 50s the American defense up DARPA sponsored mathematicians to solve their military programs military programs were ideas to get the logistics of some military thing right and they of course lead to optimization problems because you want to solve it as fast as possible or with as little cost as possible or with as little material as possible and that's how the word programming came into the optimization community and in the English speaking world it never left so if you solve linear optimization problems in English it's linear programming if you solve quadratic optimization problems it's quadratic programming right if you save nonlinear optimization programs it's nonlinear programming so solving optimization problems is programming and that's why dynamic programming is dynamic programming it's dynamically solving optimization problems okay in German it's called dynamische optimierung which is the right thing in German in German lineare optimierung is linear optimization right it's not programming it's in German we usually use optimierung instead of programming but in English it will be programming for the rest of the mathematical world okay so that's called dynamic programming so let's do another problem and let's do something which is related to what you've heard when you talked when we started to see each other which is linear algebra so let's do a bit about linear algebra so let me get that blackboard down that blackboard also down a bit at least well anyway okay so let's think about another problem let's think that we want to multiply matrices which is something that is not so ultra difficult right oh no I forgot one thing right I forgot an important thing actually before we go there so now this what does this help so this result at the end gets us one important information it tells us what is the best we can get out of our road right what is the best revenue that we can get of our road that's what the function returns at the end right it returns what you what you actually get what what is the money you will actually get at the end so we've figured out that it will be 10 right for the length 4 it will be 10 but what is missing what information is missing the function returns 10 at the end yeah exactly we don't know what the actual cut is we know that 10 is the best what we can get but we don't know where to cut right which is well not extremely useful it is nice to know but it's not yet perfectly useful this is a nice thing about the first one right and about the tree because we could easily follow where in the tree we did our cuts and here we can see it's 2-2 because we tried everything and then 10 came out with the 2-2 but not with our recursive or bottom up procedures it only tells us what the price is what we get so we need to figure now need to remember an additional thing right so we need to remember where we actually wanted to cut and so the only thing we know is which of these is the maximum right this is the only thing we know in the recursion because we computing maxima so we only know in the recursion where the maximum was and so let's think about this memoized cut rod again and I will not write down everything I will only use one thing we will take another array and this additional array will tell us where we actually cut only what the cut was for our problem of size n okay so let's see it's probably a good idea to get this down and write it in another color so which one is which this one is this okay this one is that okay oops okay so let's go to bottom up cut broad now the only thing we know is where we cut and it doesn't matter whether it's bottom up or whether it's memoized it's the same thing so we have to change this one so how do we change it well let's do blue so we will do something we will add a new array which is s that goes from 1 to n which is also a new array and here we will do a bit something else we will do an if we will say if q no if so let's call it do we have a p no p is c of k plus r of j minus k so we remember where we are and then we say if p is bigger than q then we remember two things so the first thing is remember what q is q is p which is the new p and then we will add the information that s of k is actually no s of l is actually k and so we remember that the best thing that we can do! for a rod of length l is that we cut it at k and actually that's not an l but it's j sorry so s of j is k the l is over there so here we can do the same change if we want to okay so now we've remembered a few things a few additional things right so what did we remember well for r I'll just write it in in blue one we know that s of one is one right this is the only cut that we can do so for r of two we know that s of two is actually two because the two is better than two ones for r of three we have to think for a second but I think for r of three s of two is also two as far as I remember no it isn't no it's not two it's actually it's actually three so s of three is three three is the best thing you can cut three now we have to go to four and in four we have all the three possibilities and here we will find that s of four is actually two okay and then s of five I have no idea because we've never tried it but we can check okay so let's see why how can we check what was what was r r of four is actually ten right r of four is ten so here we get eleven so let's think here we get eleven if we cut the five in a three then we have the three which was eight and we have the two which was five and so this is thirteen so this is thirteen this is also thirteen because it's two plus three and this is one plus four which is eleven and the road of size five is I didn't tell you but the road of size five has price where you are has price ten so the price of size five is ten which means that here we get a thirteen and the thirteen will tell us that this is actually two so s of five is two okay great so this is what we remember now what we would need to do is we need to figure out how to cut right so how do we cut well the idea is first we look at s of five well s of five says that we cut at position two right so this is the end this is the beginning the first cut will be two then we have a two for the two the cut is two so we keep the two and then we have another one of three so we look up three for the cut of three it's three so the best thing is we can cut it in a two and a three and that's the solution right so remembering these things where we had actually cut is enough to reconstruct the solution as well okay write down an algorithm that reconstructs the solution from this s this is something we can easily do on the other blackboard so let's move these down let's move this up okay so let's go and reconstruct the thing so what do we have to do we have to go through the solution so we need to print the solution so print rod cut solution okay what do we pass well we pass the length and we pass our array s so let's yeah let's get it the r's and let's get it the s's so this is the only thing and of course the length we'll also need the length okay so what do we do well we start with the rest of the piece so while our length the remaining length is still bigger than zero so what do we have to do well we print s s of l which is the first thing that tells us how long the piece is and then the rest of the piece is l minus s of l so we just say l is l minus s of l that's it so we don't have to do anything more we just print the piece length and then we keep the rest and for the rest we print the cut and so on so let's see whether this works well that's basically what we did so we look at five so s of five is two so we print the two the rest is three so we look up s of three s of three three so we print two three and then we are at zero and we finished right so this is how we get back our solution okay great now what's the time 11 08 so the next thing we talk about is matrix multiplication okay so matrix multiplication so we have matrices a one a two a three and so on until we are at an and every matrix a i is n n i times m i matrix we will change this a bit in a second because we do know we can only multiply a one to a two if the dimensions fit right so what we have to do is we have to know that the m i is the same as the n i plus one otherwise we couldn't multiply the matrix like the columns of the first matrix have to match the rows of the second because otherwise we couldn't even multiply them which means that we can replace the mi by the n i plus one so we have n numbers and we so and then we want to multiply all of them right and multiplication of matrices is it's not commutative but it's associative so we can multiply the matrices let's write four matrices okay so how can we multiply them well we could multiply them like this or we could multiply them like this right so all of these are possibilities now the interesting question there are many of them actually there are five there are five possibilities to multiply four matrices now the question is how much work is that and what is the simplest multiplication well the simplest multiplication is we just go from left to right and always multiply the matrix by the result right so how do we multiply matrices well you know how to multiply matrices we know this and this basically means go through the result to all the entries in the result and multiply all the row by the column which is when the matrices are P Q R so if C is equal to A times B and A is an R P times Q matrix and B is an R Q times R matrix then the matrix multiplication takes P times Q times R multiplications so this is the size so we have to do P times Q times R many multiplications and you have an addition a few additions but doesn't matter whether we only count the multiplications or additions the size stays the same and it's easier to calculate with PQR than with calculating all the additions this by the way is coming from very early numerical analysis where multiplying two floating point numbers took much longer than adding two floating point numbers but modern CPUs have more or less gotten rid of that problem and nowadays everything can usually be done in a single well in a few CPU cycles so additions and multiplications in former times there was a factor 80 or something between them now it's more less like a factor of two or so it's gone most of it but still calculating multiplications is the most important thing and now the question is does it make a difference now let's give an example before we do it next time so we have three matrices a1 a2 and a3 and a1 is 10 times 100 okay a2 will be 100 times 5 and a3 will be 5 times 50 meaning that the resulting matrix is a 10 by 50 matrix right no matter how we multiply them and now you can we have basically two possibilities that's the associative law right the associative law tells you you can multiply a1 times a2 times a3 and you can multiply a times a2 times a3 these are the only two possibilities to do that right so what is a1 times a2 how much do we need well a1 times a2 tells us that we need to multiply 10 by 100 by 5 right which is 5000 so we have 5000 operations for the first product and then we have to multiply a 10 by 5 matrix by 5 times 50 matrix right which is 10 times 5 times 50 which is 2500 which is altogether 7500 multiplications right so now let's talk about this possibility so a2 times a3 means we multiply a 100 by 5 by 50 matrix which is 5 by 50 is 250 times 100 is 25 000 so this product is giving us 25 000 now the result is 100 times 50 matrix which we multiply by 10 times 100 matrix which is 10 times 50 is 500 times 100 is 50 000 so we have 50 000 operations there so all together we have 75 000 operations which is a lot it's a factor of 10 right so just by choosing the wrong sequence so this is an optimization problem so if you have to multiply 10 matrices how to order them how to multiply them to get the optimal time result and this is something we will do next week I wish you a nice afternoon see you again
