Hi, morning. Welcome back. I hope all of you had a nice break, nice holidays. And today we're going to finish the quick introduction to probability theory, only to the parts of probability theory that we need. And I want to remind you that last time we discussed the setup of probability theory, right? We discussed what an expected value is, what a distribution is. We distinguished between discrete and continuous distributions. And then I started to discuss one of the important discrete distributions that we actually meet regularly in algorithm analysis. And this is basically the distribution that is based on the Bernoulli experiment. Bernoulli experiment basically is a yes-no experiment, where yes is success, no is failure. And success usually happens with probability p, and failure happens with probability 1 minus p, which is usually called q to abbreviate the notation. And what we also did last time is we talked about the geometric distribution, right? The geometric distribution saying if we have a sequence of Bernoulli trials, the question is how often do we have to take a trial until we have a first success? This is the probability distribution of this. So it tells you chance of success is p1 for one experiment, p2 for two experiments, and so on. And all together they form the geometric distribution. And we calculated. The last thing we did is we calculated the expected value of that distribution. We saw that it is 1 of p, which is somehow logical, right? So if the probability that something happens with probability p, you have to take, on average, 1 over p experiments to have at least one success. This is what you would assume. And we also said what the variance is. Calculating the variance is something we can do in the exercises. Now, I promised at the end of the last week before the Easter break, and I hope that starting from tomorrow more people will show up in the morning, that what happens with the lights? Let's go on and off. Very strange. Okay, sorry. So I promised that we will try the second thing, which is also important if you take repeated Bernoulli experiments. And the question is, let's say we fix the number of experiments. So we take N experiments. Now our question is, how many successes will we have during these N experiments? And this is the first new thing that we will discuss today. Of course, you would say, well, this is also obvious, because, well, if one experiment happens with probability p, it's a success if we take N of these experiments. Hence, on average, we should have N times p, many successful experiments. And the question is, is this right? And so the first thing we need to understand is, how does the distribution look like? And so we introduce a new random variable, as we're used to. So our random variable X will denote the number of successful experiments. experiments. If we take N experiments, what we want to do is we want to calculate the probability probability that X is K. So what is the probability that if we take N experiments, the result will be K successes? Of course, what is clear is that the probability for negative number of successes or for a number of successes that is bigger than N is obviously zero, because if we only take N experiments, you cannot have more than N successes, and there is not counting negative successes. So, of course, K will be in the interval or in the set zero to N. Well, how many possible outcomes are there if we take N experiments? And so this is something we definitely know. Again, as before, we take the notation that P is the probability of success, that Q is 1 minus P, so the probability of failure. The interesting question is, how many, how do we count this? Well, if we have K successes within N experiments, let's number the experiments from 1 to N, right? And so in order to understand what happens when we have K successes, the K successes have to happen at some of these N experiments, right? So this is the same idea as with a large bag of numbers from 1 to N, and we draw K numbers out of the bag. And the K numbers that we draw out tell us where the successes actually happened, right? If we draw a 7, then a success happened at 7, and all the others that remain in the bag are the failures. So the question is, how many possibilities do we have to draw K elements out of N, right? So to draw K balls, numbered balls out of N balls. Okay, and how can we count that? Well, so we have N balls, right? So this is from 1 to N. Those are our balls. Square balls. That's what mathematicians do. They abstract away the form, right? So K balls, N balls. So now how can we simulate that we draw K out of them? Well, I suggest the following thing. Just think about it. We put the N balls into a random order, right? Like putting them on top of each other inside the bag without looking, and then just taking out the top K of them, right? So what we do is we put them in an order, and then we take out the first K, and we leave the final N minus K inside of the board. Okay, now we have a question. How many possibilities are there to put N balls into random order? Well, this is something we've already discussed, right? It's N factorial. So there's N factorial possibilities to put them into random order. And all of them are equally likely, right? This is a random, so it's a uniform probability distribution. So the possibility that the given order happens is 1 over N factorial. Okay, now we take out the first K elements. So how many possibilities are there to take out the first K elements? Well, there is only one, because if we have a random order, we just take out the first K elements. This is an atomic operation. Now, how many of those have taken the same K elements? Well, apparently, it doesn't matter how we rearrange the first K elements, right? So what does that mean? Well, that means that we can take out... Ah, yeah, sorry. Yeah. So we have K factorial many possibilities to do that, right? And then, in order to look at the final ones, we have N minus K. The probability is N minus K to do that, right? So this is the probability of a random draw out of K elements out of N, which is, if you look at it, this is 1 divided by N over K, because this is the definition of the binomial coefficient, and this is something you learned in analysis when you discussed the binomial theorem. And so that means that there are N over K possibilities for drawing out K elements out of N. So there are N over K possibilities to choose K elements from N. Okay. Now, that tells us that here we have N over K many possibilities. And the question is now, if we have N over K many possibilities, what is the probability of each of those? Well, what's the probability? The probability of a success is P and the probability of a failure is Q. And we have exactly P successes. They are independent, so we know that it performs products, which means that we have the chance of N minus K failures happening is Q to the power of minus K. So the probability that we have K successes in N Bernoulli experiments is N over K times P to the K times Q to the N minus K. So this also forms a distribution, which is the so-called binomial distribution. This produces so-called binomial distribution. So, I can ask ourselves, what is the chance? What is the expected value of that distribution? So what is the expected value? How many expected successful experiments do we have if we take N trials? Okay, well, the first thing we can ask ourselves is what is the sum? What is the sum of K equals zero to N of the probability that X is equal to K? We know what it should be. Let's try to check. This is, of course, the sum of K equals zero to N of N over K times P to the K times Q to the N minus K. And I think you know from analysis what this is. This is, of course, P plus Q to the N by the binomial theorem, right? And P plus Q is one. So this is one to the N, which is one. Well, it should be, right? It's a probability. And this is all the possible outcomes. So, of course, they have to sum up to one probability. So all of them have to sum up to one. This is something which we can see easily. Okay, great. Now, that tells us one thing. The other thing that we need to talk about now is what is the expected value. And there are several possibilities to do this. And in half of the analysis courses I've seen, calculating basically the sum K equals zero to N, K times N over K times P to the K times Q to the N minus K is actually something that is an exercise. I don't know whether you had it, but let's write it down what it means. So I have to push this down a bit. So what is the expected value of X? Well, this is by definition. This is something we've seen last time. This is the sum K equals zero to N, the probability times the value. So we have the value is K. So X is equal to K times the probability. The probability is N over K times P to the K times Q to the N minus K. And we would like to sum up this. We produce this sum. And usually in analysis what we do is we just rearrange that. We write down what binomial coefficient looks like. Then the K cancels. Then we take properties. Then we put out an N and things like that. However, with our knowledge of probability theory, we can do something else. So what is X? X tells us that, well, X tells us how many successes we have in N experiments. Right? So now what we do is we introduce a new random variable or set of new random variables. So let's say XI. XI is the random variable that tells us whether the ith experiment is a success. Right? So what is its value? The value of XI is 1. If it is a success, then we will write about XI. So what is its value? if Xi is one, if it is a success, and zero, if it's a failure. Okay, now, what does this help us? Well, it helps the following thing, and this is something we have to think about. What is X? What is our random variable X? Well, random variable X is just the sum of i equals one to n of Xi. That tells us the number of successes, right? Because every Xi is one if it's a success and zero if it's a failure. So if we add up all the n Xi's, we get the number of successes, which is exactly what our random variable X is. Now, how do we calculate now its expected value? Well, we've learned that the expected value is linear, which means the expected value of X is, of course, the expected value of the sum i equals one to n Xi, which is, because of linearity, the sum of i equals one to n, the expected value of Xi. Which means that we have to calculate the expected value of our Xi. Right? Right? But how, so how does the expected value work? Well, it's just the sum over all possibilities of their probabilities times their value. So what is the expected value of Xi? This is, well, the first thing that happens is P. With probability P, we get a one. And with probability Q, we get a zero. That meaning the expected value of Xi is just P. It doesn't depend on i. But that means that this is just the sum of i equals one to n P, which is n times P. And if you want to check, you can also try to do this with the sum. Of course, the result is the same. And as I said, usually it's done in analysis courses. But this is the more elegant way to do it usually. Okay. Now, there is a second thing. We would like to calculate the variance. Now, if you want to calculate the variance, we can do the same trick. Why? Because all of these i experiments are independent. That's what we said. And we know that if the experiments are independent, the variance also sums up. So since the Xi are independent, we have that the variance of X is the variance of the sum i equals one to n Xi, which is the sum i equals one to n, the variance of Xi. Okay. Now, that means that we have to calculate the variance of one of these Xi's. So what is the variance? Well, the variance by definition, this is the expected value. There's something we've already calculated. This is the expected value of Xi squared minus the expected value of Xi squared. Right? This is something we know already. Okay. Okay. Now, what is the value? What is the expected value of Xi squared? Well, Xi squared means we just take the value of X and square it. Well, Xi squared is, as in a success, it's one squared, and in a failure it's zero squared. But one squared is one, and zero squared is zero. That means that the random variable Xi squared is the same as the random variable Xi. Right? So that means, so Xi squared is equal to Xi. So this, of course, is also the same as the expected value of Xi, since Xi squared is equal to Xi. Well, and we've already calculated the expected value of Xi. That was P. So this is the same as P minus P squared. We can factor out a P. So this is P times one minus P. One minus P is Q. So this is P times Q. And so, we can conclude that the variance of X is n times P times Q, because it's the sum of n equal numbers, P times Q. And so, of course, you can also put this into the sums and sum it up, if you prefer. Okay. Well. Just let me look to check something. I had a box. Oh, yeah. It seems to work. Great. Just to show you an image of the binomial distribution. Does this work? Oh, yeah. Come on. Oops. Does not work. Okay. Give me a second, please. It starts up now. Do, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, at the bottom, please, Oh, come on. That's annoying. Okay, now. Okay, so this is how the binomial distribution looks like. So this is the binomial distribution for 15 experiments, where every experiment has a success rate of 1 over 3. So we see, of course, that the largest entry is 5, which is the expected value. And to the left and to the right of the expected value, the probabilities reduce. And they reduce quite fast. So, and you can also see that distribution is non-symmetric, which is somehow clear, because there cannot be anything that is negative. On the first glance, if you've ever seen a picture of the normal distribution, it looks somehow similar, right, in form. And is this clear that it looks similar? Yeah. Why? Why? The point is, it's the sum of equally distributed things. And so there is something which is the central limit theorem. It tells you basically that if you sum up the same things, that if you take enough sums, then it will resemble the normal distribution more and more centered on the... So this is something you will learn in the probability theory class, why this resembles. And if the number of experiments is getting higher and higher, it will resemble the normal distribution more and more. And so you can basically at the end approximate, if n is high enough, you can approximate the values of the binomial distribution by doing a normal distribution. This is actually also done in tables. Okay, now that's what I want to show you. I have to switch back to the other camera mode. Okay, so there we are. Okay. Now, the next thing we are going to discuss is a few things about the tails of the binomial distributions. And I will not prove the facts. I will just write them down because proving them is a bit tedious and all of these things will be done in probability theory anyway. So what you've seen is that the binomial distribution has this large bump in the middle. And then the remaining parts, the tails as we call them, drop down quite fast, quite significantly. So what usually is important when you want to do estimates, when you want to calculate things, sometimes your algorithm has to produce k successes in order to work. And then you ask yourselves what happens if we have more than k failures or less than k failures or whatever. So sometimes you have to estimate what the tails of these binomial distributions actually are. And they are non-symmetric, right? For Gaussian distributions, it's simple because they're symmetric. It's the same on both sides. But for the binomial distribution, it's not. So it makes a difference whether we talk about the left tail, so everything that comes with less than k successes or the right tail, which happens what happens if we have more than k or more successes. And so I will write down a few theorems. You can find them in the appendix C of the book. And the first one is theorem C2. And actually, this is also a very important data science problem. Why? I'll give you an example. So what you usually, when is the binomial distribution interesting or when is important? For example, if you do medical experiments, right? So medical studies, you wouldn't call them experiments nowadays. They are still experiments, but we call them medical studies. So medical studies, what you usually do is you take some people who are desperate enough to to voluntarily take medication. Sometimes they're ill and sometimes they need the medication and you want to test whether a new drug is better in effect than the old one. Or you want to test whether immunization vaccination, for example, works or doesn't work and things like that. And so usually you would separate your population either in two parts or in just one. And you give them, either you give all of them the drugs and check whether they work or not. This is one possibility. The other possibility is you randomize it more. So you either have to check the effects whether one drug is better than the other. So you, by random, and if you say double-blind experiment, meaning that neither the patient nor the doctor actually knows which of the medication is applied to whom. So then you take two possibilities and then you compare success rates. But let's stay with the first one. So we think we have a new medication and this new medication will work against disease one, right? And we administer the medication to everybody who actually has the disease and after some amount of time, we check whether the disease has gone away or not. And then we have to figure out whether the experiment was successful or not. And so what we need to estimate at the end is what is the probability for success, meaning what is P. And then, of course, we also do other things like figuring out whether we have side effects or whether the probability of the patient falling ill from the medication is higher than the probability of success and things like that. So if all of this works out well, then we, at the end, produce and we will let the application for the new medication to be available run through or not. So this is why things take so long. But usually you don't take thousands of people and try the medication on them. Usually there's very few of them, right? So especially if it's medication for diseases that are not very frequent, right? So have very like gene therapy for hereditary diseases and things like that, right? You have maybe 10 people for whom you can try the new medication. And so every single one of these patients is a Bernoulli experiment, right? Usually you don't know what P is, but it's still a Bernoulli experiment. And the idea is that, well, for all of them, the probability is equal. And so then you have to estimate what P might be and you have to estimate what the chances of how many successes you would get and things like that, right? And if these and this is a data science problem, basically, right? Some of the doctors, so nowadays many knows, but some of the doctors know how it works, some of them don't. But it's important to understand that this is a binomial distribution problem. Unless the number of people is high enough that you can actually approximate the thing by a normal distribution. But if the number of people is small enough, the skewness of the distribution does make a difference. Only if you have a few hundred people, then there's not an issue. If you have 25, 30, then it's also quite good, the approximation. So you can go with the normal distribution. You can just calculate average values. You can just calculate, you can estimate P using some technique that you learn next semester. But for small numbers, it's still a binomial distribution problem. And for them, you have to do all of these estimates. Okay, so theorem T2 says that the probability of x being greater or equal to k actually is n over k times p to the k. So this is the first theorem. And as I said, we will not prove these theorems. The same thing is true. So a Bernoulli experiment, that is, you can turn a Bernoulli experiment on its head, right? You can declare a failure, a success, and a success is a failure. And then everything, then things just exchange by swapping p and q, the meaning of p and q. So, of course, the corollary, C3 says that the probability of x being small or equal to k is small or equal to n over k times q to the k. Of course, sorry, q to the n minus k. We swap it around, q to the n minus k. Okay, great. So those are the two important things. Now, we can get it a bit better, which is the next theorem C4, which is a bit something like the corollary C3, but a bit sharper. So, or do I want to do that? So, I have to check what the time is. Do we need that? I think not at the moment. Well, let's write it down anyway. Anyway. Okay, so theorem C4. We want to have an estimate for what the probability is that x is smaller than k. So, this is quite a crude estimate, what the probability is that x is smaller than equal to k. So, we can do it actually better, and this is theorem C4. And this is a bit more complicated formula. So, it's k times q. So, we have k times the probability of failure. Then we divide this by the expected value, which is n times p. And the deviation, which is n times p minus k. So, that's the first ones. And then, what remains is the probability of k, which is this one. n over k times p to the k times q to the n minus k. Which is a better estimate than the one we get from corollary C3. So, the quotient in the beginning is, by the way, smaller or equal to 1 whenever k is smaller or equal to n times p over 2. So, this is smaller or equal to 1 if k is smaller or equal to n times p over 2. Which is something that means usually if you're far away enough from the peak. So, of course, we can swap these things around by just swapping again success and failure. So, we can get the other direction. But what I made wrong, sorry about that, is this is a strict smaller. I forgot that. So, the probability that this is actually bigger than k is also something which is very similar. So, the probability that x is bigger than k is smaller than n minus k times p divided by k minus np times n over k times p to the k times q to n minus k. Okay, I'm losing my… Okay, I'm losing my… Okay. So, those are the important things that we likely need later on. Well, no, one more. Whenever this is basically a result of the theorem, so it's corollary C9 and I skipped theorem C8. So, corollary C9. I made a note that this is also an estimate that we need. So, corollary C9 says the probability that X minus NP is greater or equal to R, so that we deviate more. And this is true if R is at least the size of the expected value. That means that the tail of the binomial distribution drops really, really fast, right? It goes like R to the R. R to the R is something we've discussed. It's quite fast, right? If you think back to the exercises class. So, here we have an E to the R and an N to the R. But the R to the R, of course, is something that really, really is very fast. Okay. So, those are some estimates that we'll need later on in the lecture course. Are there without proof? The proofs are a bit annoying and long and we don't do probability theory here. It's only an introduction. Okay. Now, what we do next is we talk about why we actually did that. So, we jump back to our chapter five. So, we're now in chapter five. And the chapter five is about probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms. So, we're considering the following. The following problem. You own a company and owning a company takes a lot of work. And so, since you are responsible for taking important decisions, what you cannot do, and of course, you know that from movies, what you cannot do is you cannot do all your office work by yourself. So, you're hiring an assistant. Of course, what you want to have is a really capable assistant, right? But of course, nowadays, it's difficult to get good personnel. So, you call a headhunter. You know what a headhunter is? Of course, not somebody who is actually responsible like in the US for finding people who fled, who left their bail behind and didn't go to court. But so, you know, in the US, you have to pay a fee if you want to get out of court, right? And of course, the fees are quite high. So, sometimes you have to pay a few hundred thousand. If you cannot afford that, you can spend a 10% of this fee and go to somebody who lends you the money. And you sign a contract that you actually show up in court at the end, right? And then if you don't show up in court, they lose their money that they spent for you to get out of jail. And so, what they do is they set headhunters for you that they can't capture you so that they get back their money from the court. So, this is not what I mean. What I mean is a perfectly legal form of headhunter that you can, as an employee, as an employer, you can hire somebody to find capable people for you. So, for example, if you need a real good office assistant that knows four languages or so, because you're talking to people in the eastern part, right? So, you need probably or she or she probably needs to talk to speak Czech and probably needs to speak Bulgarian, but also very good English and probably also Spanish or whatever. So, you try to find people who know the work, who have a degree in something. And this is difficult to find. You can either post this online or you can hire somebody to find these people for you. And they will check their CV. They will check their and they have a list of people. And so, these are headhunters. Headhunters. And if you, as an employer, call them, they will send you candidates, right? And for every candidate they send you, you will have to pay them a fee. A small fee. If you hire them, if you actually say, okay, this is the right candidate for me, you have to pay them a high fee. Maybe two monthly salaries or things like that. Which is great if you have jobs that are very specialized. Like, of course, you wouldn't probably do this for a secretary. But if you need to find somebody who runs a theater for you, this is much better. This is a more specialized job. Okay, anyway. So, you have this problem that you have to find somebody who can actually, who is best for you. So, you pay small fees. Let's say, you have the C, interview fee. Fee for interviewing the candidate. And CH is the fee for hiring. Now, I have the following idea. You're a very, very bad employer. And you only want qualified people. So, your idea is the following. Well, you see, Headhunter sends me a candidate. And if the candidate is better than my current personal assistant, I will fire my current personal assistant and hire the new one. Okay? I will do this all the time until, because by this method, at the end I will have the best qualified person. Right? Okay. So, this is probably not very friendly, but this is a possibility to get the best candidate out of all. Now, so this is the hiring method. So, now we want to figure out how much that costs us. Right? So, what do we have to do? We have to interview. Well, no matter in what order the candidates arrive, eventually, since I do not know who is the best qualified one, I will have to interview all of them. Right? So, what is the cost? So, N candidates, N possible candidates. So, what is the cost for hiring? Well, of course, I have to interview all of them. So, I will have to pay N times CI. N times the cost for interview. And then, I will have to hire people. So, the question is, how often do I hire people? So, this is difficult to know, because this very much depends on the sequence, how the candidates actually arrive. If the best one shows up first, I will hire that one and I will send all the others back home. Right? So, I will only have to pay the fee for hiring once. If it's the other way around, the candidates arrive in ever increasing qualification, I will have to hire N times. So, let's call it M. So, let's call M times the hiring costs. M is the number of hirings. And this is something we do not know. Right? This is unknown. The nice thing is, no matter what M is, I will always have to pay N times CI. So, this is a cost that is fixed, which doesn't depend on the data. But this is something that depends on the data. And of course, the hiring problem is just a replacement idea for many data science problems. Right? You get measurements. You want to keep the best thing, like doing an optimization algorithm for anything. Right? Like if you play chess, for example, let's just consider that we're playing chess. We want to find the best move. And we have an analysis method of analyzing what the quality of a move is and things like that. So, all of these things basically are the same idea. So, we stick with our hiring idea because everybody understands that. So, we want to figure out what M is. Now, this algorithm, of course, depends on the data. And so, what we can do, we can do as we are used to, we can do our worst case analysis. So, how much resources do we have to spend in the worst case? And this is easy. That's something we've already done. So, worst case. The worst case is that M is equal to N. And this happens exactly once if the candidates arrive exactly in monotonically increasing competence. But this is rare, right? So, if a headhunter sends us the candidates, then, of course, they also don't hopefully. Of course, if they are clever, they do it like this. Because if they know that you hire in that way, they will, since they get the fees, they will intentionally send you the candidates in monotonically increasing competence order. Because then, they make the most money. And this is important to understand. So, you can only assume, right, that the headhunter company is responsible and is trustworthy and is not deliberately trying to get money out of you. So, you could assume that they work well and that the candidates really arrive in random order. If you have N candidates and they really arrive in random order, then every order has the same probability. So, how many orders are there? That this is something we already calculated because that basically means that we put N candidates and let's assume that all of the competences are strictly different, that they arrive in some order. So, the probability that this actually happens, since all of the permutations have the same probability, is 1 over N factorial. Which is tiny, tiny, tiny, even for small numbers, N. So, the probability that this happens, right? And now, is it big if? If all permutations are equally likely, is 1 over N factorial. And we know from the exercises class that 1 over N factorial basically increases almost like N to the N, which is really fast. So, 1 over N factorial is tiny, even for very small numbers of N, even for 10 candidates. This is negligible small. Negligibly small. But we don't know whether actually the company, the headhunter company that we actually use is honest, right? They could try to spoof us. Okay. Okay. So, what we can do now is we can try to figure out what is our average cost if we assume that the distribution of candidates follows a specific distribution. So, if we assume that the data, i.e., the competence of the candidates, the competence order, the order of competence of the candidates, is uniformly distributed, we can calculate the average cost for hiring. So, we're performing an average case analysis. So, we're performing an average case analysis. And for algorithms, of course, it could be dollars, but it also usually it's runtime that we analyze. This is usually the resource we're interested in if you're doing algorithmic analysis. But of course, algorithms not only use time, they also use memory. Sometimes they even use dollars if you have to call, I don't know, cloud calculation power that actually costs money. So that's a possibility, but usually it's runtime. Now, we will in a very short time figure out what the number is for that. Let's try to understand how this works. And we are going back to one of our examples on the other blackboard. And that's why I deliberately calculated it like that. So if we think back about this way of calculating the expected value of our binomial distribution, we introduced this strange random variable that is one for success and zero for failure. These random variables have a name. They're called indicator random variables. So this is a subs and I have no idea why it's in that order in the book. But so we have indicator random variables. And an indicator random variables basically says we have a probability distribution and we have an event A. Remember what this was? And the indicator random variable of the event A, which is just written as I of A. This is just one if A happens and zero otherwise. There's a possibility, for example, this is reducing the event A to a Bernoulli experiment. Right? So this is taking any experiment for everything and making a Bernoulli experiment out of it. If our event happens, our indicator random variable is one. And if the event doesn't happen, the indicator random variable is zero. So, therefore, what happens is, and this is simple. This is something we already know. The expected value, this is something we calculated just in the backdoor, but I will write it down again. The expected value of an indicator random variable is just the probability that A happens, right? This is something we already done. So this is just the probability of A. Okay, now. Now let's use that to analyze a hiring problem. What is interesting for us is, of course, this value M. Because this tells us the most important information on how much we will have to pay. And so what is interesting for us is X. It's as we consider the random variable X, which is the number of hirings. And of course, as before, what we know, we can write this as a sum. So X is the sum of i equals 1 to n Xi. What is X? What is X i? Well, X i is the i-th candidate is actually being hired. And if we know that the i-th candidate is hired, we know that X is the number of hirings. But that, of course, means that the expected value of X is, as before, the sum i equals 1 to n and the expected value of Xi. And what is the expected value of Xi? Well, that's the expected value that the i-th candidate is hired. But Xi is an indicator random variable, right? Because this is 1 if the candidate is hired and 0 if it's not hired. So we know what the expected value is. It's just the probability that the i-th candidate is hired. So this is just the probability that the i-th candidate is hired. Okay, great. Now, that means that we have to figure out what is the probability that the i-th candidate actually is hired. So when is the i-th candidate being hired? Well, it's hired exactly if their competence, the competence of the i-th candidate, is higher than the competence of all the i-1 candidates that came before them. Right? Right? Okay. Well, what is their chance that it is true? Well, basically, we don't know the first i candidates. Right? So all of them have the same probability of being the best qualified among the first i. Which basically says that the probability that the i-th candidate is better than all the others that came before them is 1 over i. Because all of them are the same. So, this is 1 over i. Which means this is the sum i equals 1 to n. 1 over i. Well, we have to figure out what this is. And this is a very famous series, the harmonic series. And so, if you ask, which is something we know from analysis that this series diverges, right? And so, which is good to know that tells you if you send, if you ask the headhunter that they should send you infinitely many candidates, you will have to spend an infinite amount of money to do that. Which doesn't matter because you anyway have to spend an infinite amount of money just for interviewing them. So, which is good. So, this is about resources and optimality, which is a nice thing. So, there's actually been a wonderful paper by some computer science people who analyzed if you have a given resource and you want to determine what the optimal value is of the optimal value of resource that you have to do for an office, for example. So, for example, you want to figure out how many printers you have to buy in order so that everybody is satisfied. What is the optimal number of printers? What is the optimal number of computers you have to buy and things like that? And they abstracted away. So, they said, well, your company can hire as many people as one and things like that. So, what is the optimal number of resources you have to get? And they figure out a very, very astonishing fact, which everybody would have guessed beforehand. But anyway, they figure out that the only two optima are zero, which means that you don't provide a printer at all or infinity, which means you have to buy an infinite number of printers. Everything else is not optimal. Anyway, so let's go back to this one. So, what we would like to know is what this basically is. And you probably, if you think back, you likely have proved in analysis that the sum over one over eight diverges, right? And how did you do that? You actually showed that if you take two to the n summons, then this grows by one all the time. But that basically tells you that this thing grows like the logarithm. So, this is ln of n plus something that is O of one. And so, that tells you basically what the expected value is. And now, let's compare that to the worst case, right? The worst case is that you have to pay your hiring fee n times. But the average case tells you that you have to pay your hiring fee only ln times, which is a huge difference. So, in the worst case, this is a bad idea to hire people and fire them when somebody better comes around. Well, from a human standpoint, it's probably always a bad idea, but not from an employer standpoint. Because on average, you don't have to pay a lot. It's just logarithmic growth. And so, you still have one bad problem. The bad problem is you do not know what the headhunter actually is doing. They might still try to betray you by sending you the candidate in the worst order for you. So, what you don't have, you don't have control over your data, right? You have control. You have control over your algorithm, but you don't have control over your data. And in order to make this true, you can only assume that your hiring, your headhunter company is actually honest and sending the candidates in some order where they arrive at the headhunter company. How can we get around that problem? And this is a problem that we always have in data science. How can we get around that problem? And why is this important? Well, let's think about something completely different. Now, what we want to do is we want to train a neural network, right? Which basically is the same thing. So, every data point that arrives for your training regime tells you something about the neural network. And it tells you something about where you want to put your parameters, where you want to change your parameters. They will influence how the parameters in your network will be distributed in order to understand the structure of the data. And this, of course, depends on the sequence when the data arrives. Right? So, like your hiring thing. Because you have to stop at some point and things like that. So, this is not a stupid problem in data science. So, what you can think is about the following thing. So, I don't trust my headhunter company. So, I'm doing something else. What I'm doing is I will ask them to send me their candidates, but I don't invite them for interviews. I just wait. I just wait until they send me N candidates. And then I'll take the list. And then I pick them in random order from the list. Well, this somehow seems to be the same problem, right? This seems to be the same idea. But there is a very, very important swap happening. And the very important swap is that in the first idea, we had a deterministic algorithm where the data arrived in random order. In this or possibly random order, but we don't have control over whether the data actually does arrive in random order. The second idea is we just take all the data and then we randomize the data ourselves. And so, we have control that the data will definitely arrive in random order. Right? So, that means we have randomized our algorithm. So, we change the algorithm. We change the algorithm. We change the algorithm. We change the algorithm. By taking the list of all candidates. And put them in random order ourselves. So, the first step of our algorithm is to take a list and randomize the list. That changes a very important thing in the algorithm. important thing in the algorithm because it changes our algorithm from a deterministic algorithm to a so-called randomized algorithm. If we run our first deterministic algorithm a gazillion times and we just keep the same sequence of data from our headhunter company, we will always get the same result. But if we randomize the data by ourselves, every time we run the algorithm, there will be a different sequence and there will be different costs. So we don't have an average case analysis anymore. What we now have is we have a really true random algorithm and what we call it then is the expected cost of our algorithm. So the expected runtime, the expected cost. So now we can compute the expected cost. And this is a very important distinction. Don't forget this. This might come up in the exam. So probabilistic analysis of deterministic algorithms uses the fact that we say that the data for this algorithm has a specific probability distribution. Expected cost or expected runtime is for algorithms that are randomizing themselves. So that are randomized algorithms that are not deterministic anymore, but they work differently from each run to the next run. Right? Because then this, the sequence of data data doesn't matter doesn't matter anymore. And this is something that you also see from machine learning, for example. So if you do neural networks, what you usually do is you randomize the data that you put in. And in the next epoch of your training, you randomize it differently. Right? So the training is a true randomized algorithm. And this randomization procedure makes the difference whether we do an average case analysis or whether we compute, whether we produce the average case runtime or we compute the expected runtime or the average case memory consumption or the expected memory consumption. Right? So this is the important difference. Average case is for deterministic algorithms where we assume a probability distribution of the data. Expected something is for randomized algorithms where we don't assume anything about the data. The nice thing about expected cost is expected cost is always ln of n. Expected cost doesn't have really, it does have a worst case. And the worst case is still n. But the probability that the worst case happens is 1 over n factorial. And this is a Bernoulli experiment in some sense, something very similar to it. So this has a very high lump and very fast decaying tails. So your average case algorithm will always have a very, very high probability produce something which is close to ln of n. So this is an important distinction. Average case and expected case. Expected cost and average cost. So this is the difference between randomized and not randomized. Now the last thing, which is something which now we have to produce an algorithm. And the last thing we need to discuss is, now let's assume that we have data. What is a good algorithm to actually produce a random permutation? Because this is something that happens very often. We get data, we need to randomize the sequence. How do we do that properly? What is a good algorithm for randomizing data? What is a good algorithm for random sequence? Interestingly enough, this is quite easy. I will display it on the board up there. And you will see that it is a very, very short algorithm. So this is it randomly permute. Ah, yeah, I have to swap the camera angle. Sorry about that. Okay, if it's randomly permute, that's nothing but. We just run through our whole sequence from 1 to n. And for every single element, we just choose a random number. So random i n chooses a random number between i and n. And we just swap the i-th element with any random element that comes after it. This is simple, right? It's linear effort in the sequence. So the question is, why should this happen? Why should this work? Right? So why does this algorithm work? Why does this, does it really produce a truly random sequence? What does it mean, random sequence? Well, it means that every sequence actually happens with probability 1 over n factorial at the end. Okay, so that's the question. So this is so simple that I think we can keep it in our memories, how it works. And so why is this in reality? Why does this produce a random sequence? And of course, this is a loop. So in order to prove that, we need to get the loop invariant. So this is something we know. Okay, so. The idea is, we talk about a, the following loop invariant. Whenever we start with the i-th iteration of the loop, the sub-array of the first i-1 elements contains an i-1 permutation. So an i minus, a permutation of the first i-1 elements. Well, no. Okay, let's say it like this. It's simpler like this. Okay, so. If we have a sequence of elements and we cut our array into parts. Right? Right? So here, we have k elements and here we have n minus k elements. We call this sequence a k permutation if this here is basically a random choice of the k of k of k from n elements. So this is a k. It's a k permutation if the first k elements are all different and from the set 1 to n. Okay? Ah, sorry. From the set a1 to an. So basically, that's indices in the array. Okay? No, it's 1 to n is simpler and that's basically array indices. So what we say is prior to the i-th loop. So at the start at the start of the i-th loop. The i-th iteration of the loop. Loop. a1 to a i-1 contains a k permutation. Of the array. Okay. Okay. So I will clean that one. Simpler for me to write. So I will clean that one. It's simpler for me to write. I will clean that one. at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the start at the Well, the point is, at the start, we have an I-1 permutation of the elements that are not there. So the loop invariant at the beginning is trivial because we don't have any area to start with. So at initialization is trivial. Because A0 is a zero permutation. A0 is a 1 permutation, which is trivial. Okay. Or we can even start before that. So let's do... Yeah. We just write the initial... There is no initial array. There is no... Let's write it like this. Initial array of zero elements. This is what I wanted to write. Okay. No. Ah, yeah. And what I also wanted to say, and I forgot this. Sorry. For each possible permutation, the probability is N minus I plus 1 factorial over N factorial. So I forgot to write this down. But this is something... Every... Every... Every... Every... I minus 1 permutation... Permutation... Has probability... N minus... N minus... I plus 1 factorial over N factorial. N minus I plus 1 factorial over N factorial. Yeah. This is the important part. This is the important part. Sorry. And of course, the probability is 1. In the beginning. This is quite trivial. And... If I is 1, it's N factorial over N factorial. So this is true. Okay. Now... Let's... Let's... Do the... Important step, which is the maintenance step. Okay. What does the maintenance step do? It takes the ith element and chooses a random element beyond the ith element, so from I to N, and swaps them. Now... What do we know? We know that the sub-aray I, a 1 to I minus 1, contains... A I minus 1 permutation. And every such permutation... Has probability... N minus I plus 1 factorial divided by N factorial. And... Now... What we do is we swap the ith element with elements that are beyond them. So if we swap them, they're still all different. So the all different things doesn't change. So after swapping... After swapping... A I... And a random... I... To N... It is still... A permutation. A K... It is... It is still an I. It is still an I. It is the... The array... A K... It is... It is an I. It is still an I. It is the... The array... The array... A from 1 to I... Is an I permutation. Because still all elements are distinct. Now what we have to calculate is the probability, right? So... That means... We have to figure out... What is the probability of all of these permutations? So now... We know that the first... I minus 1 elements... Have... Probability... N minus I plus 1... Factorial... Divided by N factorial. So what we need to show... Is that after the... Iteration... What happens is that every element has N... Minus I factorial... N factorial... Divided by N factorial. So... Let's calculate that. Let E1... E1... Be... The... Event... That a particular... I minus 1... Permit... That a particular... I minus 1... Permit... Permit... I minus 1... Permit... Permit... Has been... Has been... Constructed... In the sub array... A... From... 1 to I minus 1... From... 1 to I minus 1... I... I minus 1... In the sub array... From... 1 to I minus 1... From... And... E2... The event... I minus 1... I minus 1... E2... The event... That... Xi... That... Xi... That Xi... Has been put... that xi has been put into ai. So we have the sequence x1 to xi. This is our subsequence. And this, of course, consists of two parts of the first sequence xi to xi minus 1 and xi, right? And in order to get a specific permutation, xi permutation, x1 to xi, we have two events must happen. The event first, what has to happen is that we put the first i minus 1 in sequence, and then we have to choose exactly the ith element for the sequence x1 to xi to happen, right? So in order to get the specific permutation, x1 to xi permutation, we first, in the loop before, we must have constructed x1 to xi minus 1, and then we have to put xi at the last position. Okay, so what is the probability of E1? This is something we know. The probability of E1 is by a loop invariant, n minus i plus 1 factorial divided by n factorial. So what we need to calculate is what is the probability of E2? E2. Okay, now, this is something we need to figure out. So what do we have to do? We need to have that E1 and E2 happen. So we need to calculate the probability of E1 and E2 to happen. And we know from our, they are not independent, this is important, but we know that this is the probability of E2 happen given A1 times the probability of E1. We know the probability of E1. So what we, yeah, sorry. What's the time? Ah, sorry. Oh, yeah. I just, I'm sorry. I didn't see that the time was already up. Sorry. Sorry about that. There is no clock anywhere. So, yes, of course, we do it tomorrow and I wish a nice afternoon. Sorry about that. I'm also in a hurry. I'll do it shorter tomorrow. Thank you.
