So I have to check something more. Oh, come on. Just a second. Perfect. So as a summary, yesterday we talked about what an algorithm is. We talked about how to, yeah, how to, why they are important, what the correct algorithm is and things like that. And very well. And today we're going to continue from there. Bye-bye. So is there somewhere? Ah, this great talk here. Wonderful. Okay. Then you, really, it did help that you said something. That's blackboards. Okay, great. Now, we, yeah, yesterday we started to define what the correct algorithm is. I talked a bit about halting and other stuff. And we also, we also introduced the algorithm insertion sort. Right? I showed a few things from insertion sort. And I have to check one more thing, which is whether this beamer actually works. So just a second. I'm trying to get this done as well. So let me see. Can't change the size. This is very annoying. So let me see. Ah, it starts. Oh, very, very projects just where I have the blackboard, which is bad. So we need to move this one down. Okay. That would work. Okay. Great. Wonderful. That's what I wanted to try. So we have our, let me see. I'm looking for the algorithm. Just a second. Just opened it. So I need to get there. Yeah. So this is our algorithm insertion sort, as you remember from yesterday. So we want to show that this algorithm is correct. And as we talked about yesterday is that we need to prove two things. The first thing is that the algorithm stops, halts eventually. And the second one is that the algorithm produces the correct output in all situations. And that it halts is quite simple. So usually, as you know from programming already, all the instructions are operated one by one from top to bottom. And the only thing here, since it's not recursive, it doesn't call itself. Since it only contains loops, the only possibility for that algorithm not to halt is either one of the sub instructions doesn't halt. Right? Or we end up in an infinite loop. So these are the only two possibilities. And for recursive ones, we have another one, which is infinite recursion. But here, all the operations used are elementary. So we do not call any subroutines or anything like that. That could cause us not to halt. And then we have loops. And those two loops have different indices. So we have the index i for the for loop. And we have the index j for the while loop. Okay, let's look at the for loop first. The for loop, we never change i anywhere inside the for loop. And so the for loop has just fixed size, right? It goes n minus 1 steps from 2 to n. So this is the for loop. Then we have to talk about the while loop. While loop is more dangerous because in the while loop, we have just two stopping conditions for the while loop. The first stopping condition is that j has to be bigger than 0 and that aj is bigger than key. Well, since we do not know anything about the a's, we need to look at the j's in order to figure out whether this algorithm definitely stops. And so we start with some j. If the j is smaller or equal to 0, the while loop is not even started. So we don't have a problem. And if the j is positive, we have to check what happens to the j inside the while loop. And what we can see is that in line 7, the j is subtracted by 1. So it's decreased by 1 in every iteration. And so since the natural numbers are well ordered, so there is a smallest one in every subset, eventually the j's will reach 0 at some point because we subtract 1 by 1. By induction, we can see that the j's eventually will reach 0. So the while loop definitely ends. So the only thing that is now remaining is to figure out whether this algorithm actually stops. And what we usually do when we analyze algorithms that contain loops or other things, as I told you yesterday, we are using a method that's basically called structural induction plus a second thing which is called loop invariance. And I will first talk about loop invariance. So is it, is it, that's what I wanted to ask. Is it only for, only this one or all the other lights as well? Do you want the other lights as well or only the one for the blackboard? Of course. 50%? 50%? That's fine. Welcome. Okay, so. So we talk about one part of these induction things are called loop invariance. Of course, they're concerned with loops. So while loops and for loops and things like that. And so the question is, what is a loop invariant? Well, a loop invariant is basically the following stuff. So it's very similar to induction. So for a loop invariant, we have two things. So we define some property. And this property usually depends on the loop variable. So let's call this property P of I, when I is the loop variable. Well, there are, of course, loops that don't have any variables in them. But the idea is then the same. We just talk about the easy loop now for J equals 110. Okay, so define some property. Then we check. Check. That's the first step. Check that or prove, actually prove or show that P of 0 or P of P of I is satisfied before the loop starts. Right? So this is the first step. Then for every iteration, we need to check. So this is the initialization step. Actually, it's called initialization. The next step is the maintenance step. The maintenance step says that whenever it's true before the iteration of a loop, it's also true before the next iteration of the loop. So this is very similar to our induction hypothesis and induction step. So if P is true before a new iteration of the loop starts, it will be true before the next iteration. which means that during the iteration, we make sure that the property is reproduced. And then we have the third one, which is the termination step. And the termination step basically tells us that of course, if all these things are true, at the end of the loop, of the loop, P of I delivers a required property that is useful. So what I mean by that, let's look at our insertion sort. Right? So what is the property that we want to have for insertion sort? For the insertion sort example, we talk about the outer loop, so the for loop. Um, So what will be our P of I for the for loop? Well, we will say that our loop invariant will be the following property. the array or the subarray a that runs from a 1 to I minus 1 of each iteration only consists of elements of elements that are in the original array segment a to I 1 to I minus 1 and end they are sorted ascendingly. So this is the property we want to show for our for loop in insertion sort. Okay, let's see how can we do that. So the first step, of course, would be the initialization step. Well, for the initialization step, we have that I is equal to 2. Right? So before the first loop, when the first loop starts, I is equal to 2. That's what I said. That's what it says. Now let's look at the subarray. The subarray from A is from 1 to 2 minus 1 is the subarray that only consists of 1, of A11. So we look at the array A11. The element, the array A11 contains a single element. Right? This is the single element of the array A11 that started in the beginning and it's sorted because it's very trivial to sort a single element. the single element is always sorted. So A11 is a single element only and it so it is automatically sorted. Okay. Now let's look at the maintenance step. Okay. So what do we have to show? We can, like in induction, we can assume that at the beginning of the array it's true. So at the beginning of the loop it's true. So what we know is true it is true that A12i-1 is sorted and contains only elements of the original element. original A1i-1 array. What do we have to prove? We have to prove that after the loop finishes, after the iteration of the loop finishes that the array A1 to i is sorted. Right? and only contains elements from 1 to i. Okay. So how does the loop work? The loop reads the element AI. This is the first thing it does. So we have the while loop inside. In the while loop, so the first thing is that key is AI. So this is what the loop says and it doesn't even access anything beyond that because the while loop starts at AI minus 1 and then starts to compare things. Right? So it reads the element AI. So we only access elements in the original range A1 to i. And since we only access elements in the original range A1 to i, after the loop finishes, before the next loop starts, only elements in the range A1 to i are actually in the first section. So we only access elements of A1 to i minus 1 and AI. So after the loop, after the iteration, A1 A1 to i will only contain elements of the regional range A1 to i. Okay, so what else? Now we have to look at the while loop. Well, the while loop, as we've seen, takes entries. Let's look at it again. So it's a bit annoying that I have to move this blackboard up and down. Let me see. Let's see if I switch it on, whether you can still see anything? No, you can't because I can't. Can you see everybody? No, you cannot, right? Can you also see the loop? No. Even if I move it up, possible, not possible, not possible. Okay, let's do it like this. Okay, great. Now, I have to think about something. Oh, it's anywhere there. Yeah. Okay, great. You can see it online. So online it's recorded. So, now, if we look at the while loop, that's what I said, right? So the key is AI. So we start with AI and then we start with J equals Y minus one, I minus one. So we only access elements that are in the original old loop and did the highest thing that can actually ever happen is that we access, we write something to AJ plus one. But since J is smaller or equal I minus one, J plus one will always be smaller or equal to I. Right? So we only access elements in the range one to I. And now we have to prove that the while loop actually makes sure that after the while loop finishes, all the elements in there are sorted by order. So what do we know? We know in the beginning that A, so we know that A one to I minus one is sorted. one to This is something we already know. Now, what does the loop do? The first thing what we can see is that the loop doesn't change the sequence of elements within the range A1 to I minus one. Because the only thing it does, it either copies it further up or it keeps it where it is. Which means that it never breaks the order of the elements one to I minus one. Since elements of A one to I minus one are only copied max one element up, the order of these elements is never disturbed. OK, now, the final thing that happens is that A J plus one is written to using key. Key was the original element that was not sorted, right? And so let's look at when do we write key to A J plus one. We write key to A J plus one if the Y loop ends, right? So when does the Y loop end? There are two possibilities for the Y loop to end. The first possibility is that J is equal to zero, right? So if J is equal to zero, the Y loop will end. So what happens if J is equal to zero? If J is equal to zero, the Y loop will have continued all the way down, meaning that all the elements A J were actually bigger than key, meaning that key was small or equal to all the A J's, and then we added a key to A one, meaning that we made sure that key, so this implies that key is small or equal to A J for all J in the range one to I minus one, meaning that the key is basically the smallest of these elements or it's not larger than the other one, and so what we at the end have is that A one is equal to key, and since all the other elements are still sorted and A one is smaller than all the others the array is still sorted right so this means that A one to I is sorted so what is the second possibility the second possibility is that J is strictly bigger than zero if J is strictly bigger than zero then the loop has broken since AJ is smaller equal to key so that means that AJ is smaller equal to key and then we enter but at the same time what we also know is that AJ plus one is still strictly bigger than key key the old AJ plus one is still strictly bigger than key since the old AJ plus one was strictly bigger than key the old AJ plus one now has ended up in AJ plus two right and then we enter key and so afterwards we have that AJ which is the old AJ is small or equal AJ plus one which was where we put key to which is smaller than AJ plus two and this means that the array is also sorted right so this means that this is the same implication so in both cases after we stop the iteration we still have only the elements between one and i and we are still sorted right so we finished our maintenance step because before the step starts we have our property and before the next iteration starts or when the termination step starts we still have our property so we still have the elements that were originally there but now we have sorted them okay now this is so let me I have to switch though and fro so that you can always oh no what's there wrong one okay there we are oh what this is somewhat very very enerving so okay okay great now let's turn that off there is one more thing which is the termination step and since the termination step is so short I will write it there okay the termination step is what happens when we end our loops well for the termination step I is equal to n and our j was one bigger after the step so what we have after the step is that the elements of the original range so a one to n contains the original range contains the original elements that's the first thing and the second thing is that a one to n is sorted right because this was a property and this is the property at the end of the loop right at the beginning of the loop it was that a one to n minus one was sorted and only contained original elements but the maintenance step said that at the end of the loop we showed it for one to i and i is equal to n so we showed it to one to n and since a one to n is sorted we finished right because this is what we wanted to do we wanted the algorithm to sort loop invariant proof to show that insertion sort actually is a correct algorithm right because we talked about the whole thing first we showed that it always halts and now we showed that it produces the correct output right those are the two steps that you need to show that an algorithm is actually correct okay now that's what we have and we will start with the next analysis which is basically we want to figure out what the running time of insertion sort actually is next step analyze the running time okay now let's think again about what we're going to do and I probably start by projecting it again I always have to check whether it's properly recorded it seems to okay okay let's look at the algorithm up there probably I have to turn off the lighting whenever I project something okay this will become a bit annoying but never mind okay so let's look at the running times of everything okay how do we analyze running times of algorithms well usually we're looking at each line of code separately and figure out what how much work we will spend in each of the loops okay now let's see we have a the first line which is our for loop right the for loop how often will this thing be executed well basically we will have to use in the for loop we will have to do a few things we will have to add we have to initialize our counter with the value i and then we will have to start incrementing the counter and checking whether the counter has already reached n right so what do we do we initialize it with 2 and then we have to compare it to n but we also have to compare it to n the first time because the array could only be one element long so we have to compare it every time and we also have to compare it to n plus one the last one so that's really n operations that we have to take and since we do not specify how much that costs we do not yet say that it costs only one thing if we would know how fast a computer is or how good our executions are we would know the constant c but it costs some time c one and we have to execute it n times right so we definitely know that the loop inside will only be executed at most n-1 times and so the retrieval of the ith element and the storage of it in key will be done n-1 times and this will be with some cost c2 we don't care about the comment in there so everything that starts with two slashes in the book and has something written in red is a comment so this will not be executed at all and then we will have to assign to j the value i minus one we do this n minus one times and this costs c4 steps well and you can see why it costs more because what do we have to do in this line we have to access the value of i we have to decrement the value of i and we have to assign it to j and depending on the kind of computer you have this is probably three operations in some cpus it's only two operations because they can retrieve and decrement in one step it depends on what kind of cpu you have and then we do have the while loop right and when you when you look at this you can see there is a sum on the side and this is because it's a loop inside the large loop so what is the idea the idea is that we do not know how often we actually execute the while loop right because this depends on our data because it depends on what aj actually is and what key actually is and so what we do is we just say well let's see let's call the time that it takes or the number of times the time that it takes to execute the while loop the number of times it takes by ti right so when we are in the i step of the for loop it takes some unspecified time ti the number of times the while loop is actually executed is ti and so what do we know we the while loop itself will be executed ti times so that the while test up there will be executed ti times and it will have a constant c5 because again here we have to access the value of j we have to compare it to 0 we have to access the value of aj we have to access the value of key we have to compare the two and then we have to perform an end operation which is an additional boolean operation and then only can we determine this is six instructions then only can we determine why that we execute the y loop or whether we jump beyond the end right and so we have to execute this ti times the sum right because for every i we have to execute this y loop so we have to execute it for i equal 2 for i equal 3 and so on until we end up in i equals to n so that's why this is a sum there and the stuff inside the y loop we have to access at most ti minus one time because the difference between the minus one and the i is again as before we even have to test the stopping condition when we do not execute the y loop so we always have to test the condition one time more than actually what we do inside the loop right do you understand that everybody gets that or is it too complicated you have to ask questions if it's not clear if it's too trivial then I can speed up some question yeah yeah that's what I said the ti is the unknown number of iterations we take in the while loop this depends on the data how much ti is and we do not yet know that so we have to think about something how can we actually get information out of that ti right so this is something we'll do in a second and then we have all the other two elements will be executed one times less so that's why we have this sum and then of course the last thing is outside the while loop so we will again execute it n minus one time and so this is all the stuff that we add together and this produces and I will copy that to the blackboard this produces this produces a total running time tn of summing up all of these things so we had c1 times n plus c2 times n minus one plus c3 times n minus one no c4 well yeah it's c4 times n minus one in the book because c3 was the basically non-existent coefficient of the comment so and then we have these sums plus c5 times the sum of i equals 2 to n ti plus c6 times the sum of i equals 2 to n ti minus one plus c7 times the sum i equals 2 to n ti minus one plus c8 times n minus one so this is the total running time of our algorithm and it doesn't look very nice it does not look very nice so what we can see however and this is very important this yes sorry yeah so this is why c5 is some constant because we do not yet know how much it really is it depends on the cpu how yeah c5 is just a constant yes no because they are always the ti is the number of times it's being executed so ti so ti is the number of times the number of times the while loop is executed when when the for loop is in iteration i yes yes whenever you access the list this is basically one cpu step okay so in order maybe this was not clear enough so we're analyzing algorithms in some sort of higher programming language right in reality when the computer executes such a program it first of course translates the higher programming language lines into machine code which is then operated using the cpu cpu and every cpu instruction every cpu instruction has a specific time it takes within the cpu so as we say cpu cycles right so cpu works in cycles and the cycles are what you what you read when you say the cpu is a 5 gigahertz cpu right then it produces 5 billion cycles every second and depending on what operation you're actually performing it performs it uses a specific number of cycles right so i think in intel or amd cpus it's most of the operations actually take two cycles and not one so which is somehow if you read 5 gigahertz you only get two and a half billion operations per second in reality so the point is that when you have a higher programming language like our pseudocode we don't know how these are translated to cpu instructions right so every single line of our code will be translated to cpu instructions what we do not know is how many intermediate cpu instructions are actually produced what we assume and this is only an assumption that must that needn't be true but we will talk about this a second later is whether every time we are going through this line the number of cpu cycles required will be the same and usually this won't be true because usually when we access memory it can be that the memory is already in the level one level two level three cache or has to be fetched from the memory banks which takes different amount of time depending on in which cache it already is so it would be impossible to analyze algorithms if we consider all of these things no it's not impossible I'm sorry it would be a nuisance to do so but there are definitely people who do that in order to well yeah in order to for example program really hardware optimized matrix computation routines or so they really make sure that stuff is in the cache so that it's fast enough and things like that they analyze it CPU specific but usually we don't this is too much work in the lecture course so that's why we just assume that every time we hit the line in our pseudo code it will take the same number of CPU cycles right no matter what it is and this number of CPU cycles we just call C something C1 C2 C5 does this answer a question perfect okay great now so this is our T of N this is the time and what why do we write it down in this in this strange way what you can apparently see is that this very much depends on the data because the TI in there depends on the data the Ns don't the Ns only depend on the size of the data right so these C1 C2 C4 C8 times something this is independent of which data we add this only depends on the amount of data we add so of the size of the data but the other two the other three terms the C5 C6 and the C7 term they definitely depend on the data we put in so what is the best situation that we can get the best situation that we can get in our algorithm is when the area is already sorted sorted because if the area is already sorted all the while loops will actually never execute the only thing that will happen is that it will check whether it's already sorted which is the first line of the while loop and then it will just skip the while loop and it will also do not do any other things so what we will get is that after the iteration so if the area is already sorted already sorted then ti will be equal to 1 for all i because all the while loop things are executed in one and if we look at this then what happens to t of n then t of n will be of course c1 times n because this doesn't change doesn't depend on ti plus c2 times n minus 1 plus c4 times n minus 1 plus now c5 if ti is equal to 1 always this will end up to be n minus 1 as well if ti is equal to 1 this is 0 so this doesn't contribute at all and this is also 0 also doesn't contribute at all and we have a c8 times n minus 1 c2 plus c4 plus c4 plus c5 plus c8 times n minus c2 plus c4 plus c5 I'll write it down minus c2 plus c4 plus c5 c5 plus c8 right so this is then the running time of the algorithm this is the running time of the algorithm whenever the error is sorted okay so what we can see is this running time is a linear function in n right so when the error is sorted the algorithm takes some linear function in n run running time okay now what is the worst case what is the worst case that can happen the worst case that can happen is that the error is sorted in the opposite direction so we start with the largest element and then we end up with the smallest one because then we have to exchange in the first loop the first two elements in the next loop we have to do it for all the three in the next loop we have to do it for all because we have to copy every element that is coming to the front so the first case array is sorted descendingly if this is the case then all the while loops will run for all the time and so whatever happens is that in every element ti is equal to i okay so what happens if ti is equal to i let's look at the formula again so then we have tn is equal to c1 times n this doesn't change plus c2 times n minus 1 it doesn't change as well and the c4 term also doesn't change now we have our c5 term c5 there we have the sum i equals 2 to n i plus c6 times the sum i equals 2 to n i minus 1 plus c7 times the sum i equals 2 to n i minus 1 plus c8 times n minus 1 well these things are we will change our sums a bit in order to compute the result so this is c1 times n plus c2 times n minus 1 plus c4 times n minus well i just factor this out immediately so this is c1 plus c2 plus c4 plus c8 times n minus c2 plus c4 plus c8 right so those are the terms that don't change we've seen that already and now we have to think about these things here i will change this a bit i will write this c5 as the sum of i equals 1 to n of i minus 1 right because i've added a 1 i subtract the 1 doesn't change anything right so then this sum is also something we can easily change because this is 1 plus 2 plus 3 and so on plus n minus 1 right so and these are the same so we can write c6 plus c7 times the sum i equals 1 to n minus 1 i because this is what we have and I think it would have been well anyway now what is that that is the sum of the first n minus 1 numbers and this is quite well known since Gauss that this is n times n minus 1 over 2 so this is n times n minus 1 over 2 and this here is the sum of all n of all this is n times n plus 1 over 2 minus 1 n times n squared okay so let's write this down and let's factor out all the important numbers so we have n squared over 2 times c5 and c6 plus c7 is also n squared over 2 so we have c5 plus c6 plus c7 over 2 times n squared right so then what else do we have where is the n's here we have n's so c1 plus c2 plus c4 plus c8 so what is here the n here is an n over 2 times c5 so we have c5 over 2 and here we have c6 and c7 with a minus so minus c6 over 2 minus c7 over 2 times n and then we do have a few constants so where is the constants there is constants so we have minus c2 plus c4 plus c8 then here we have a constant which is the minus one which is the c5 and we don't have a constant here there's only n's or n halves okay so in the worst case this is what the running time looks like so here in the best case this is linear in n in the worst case this depends on n squared okay now this would be somewhat a bit annoying right to write down these things always like this and it doesn't help us a lot so what we've done now is we've done an analysis we've done a best case analysis we've done a worst case analysis so we've shown how the algorithm performs with the worst possible data input and with the best possible data input and in order to get something useful out of it so that we can in addition in the future use this sorting algorithm as an input to our work and so that we don't have to care about all of these constants what we need to introduce now or what we will introduce now is we will need to write rates of growth and order of growth notation so asymptotic notation in analysis the things are called Landau symbols which is a very strange name because Landau neither invented them nor invented all of them he invented only one of them but they're still called Landau symbols actually most of them were actually introduced by Donald Knuth who is probably one of the most famous computer scientists of the 20th century and now we will introduce a few things so what we see is that yesterday we talked about comparing an old computer and a new computer with an old with a slow algorithm and a fast algorithm right so we compared what happens if we take n log n steps or take n square steps so what we see is and of course this is something you know from school already is or from analysis is that n square tends to grow much faster than n and it of course grows faster than every constant so whenever you look at this expression you know that if n is really big this term will be very small compared to this term and the bigger n gets the more negligible will be this term as compared to that one and so if you're looking very far out this whole function and only this function only the first part are almost indiscernible! Because they only differ by very few relative size! And so we can with some yeah we can say that the algorithm for large n basically behaves like a constant times n squared and we don't have to care about the n now what we want to do is we want to introduce notation that tells us that and so we define the following notation let me see I'm jumping now just for your information I'm jumping for a very short time to chapter three and then we'll come back to chapter two again so this is chapter three one and this is the O the big O omega and theta notation and then we will also have the small O and small omega notation very nice that's what I'm looking for all the titan wonderful okay so we still have this notation so we have c5 plus c6 plus c7 over 2 and so what is the big O notation so we have two functions that depend on N we have two functions f and g depending on N in N so basically if you think back to analysis we have two sequences right you learned about sequences in analysis and so we have basically two sequences sequences the two sequences are f of N and g of N and it doesn't matter whether write f of N or f N or g of N or gn so we talk about f of n and g of n so all of the notation together is concerned with these functions and we write f of n is capital O of g of n and we say is big o of this is we say f of n is big o of g of n if there exists if there exists a positive constant c in the real numbers and an n zero in the natural numbers such that two things are true the first thing is f is greater or equal zero so f of n is greater or equal zero and at the same time it is smaller than c times g of n for all n greater or equal than zero right so there is a constant such that f of n doesn't grow faster than g of n times this constant right so the constant limits the limits the times g of n limits f of n so this is the first one this is the capital O the big O notation that's the first one what we usually mean is that the function doesn't grow faster than f of n okay and it's important that the function has to be non-negative after some maybe initial sequence so it only has to be non-negative after a certain sequence limit so after some smallest index in the sequence so this is the big O notation the big omega notation is that we can have an asymptotic lower bound so this is called an asymptotic upper bound okay we write oh shit we write f of n is capital omega of t of n we say big omega of if there exists exists a constancy in the real numbers and again an index n zero in the natural numbers such that zero is smaller or equal c times g of n and smaller equal f of n so that means for all n zero n greater equal n zero this is called an asymptotic lower bound that means that your sequence doesn't grow slower than a constant times gn right so those are those are two different things the one is giving you an upper thing the other one is giving you lower thing let's have an example our t of n of before right so our t of n of before is capital o of n squared because we do know that it doesn't grow faster than a constant times n squared right so we could add one to the c6 c5 plus c6 plus c7 over two times n squared and then this one times n squared will be larger than all of the constant times n and the constant eventually right so because n squared grows faster so this is the capital o notation so we know that t of n are the time that our insertion sort takes will not grow faster than a constant times n squared this is something we proved already now what we also know is that t of n is capital omega of n because it will not grow slower than something times n this is also something we proved right so we do know that the running times of our algorithm are somewhere between something that grows linearly and something that grows quadratically so we know in the best case it will still grow linearly and the worst case it will at most grow quadratically right okay and then there is one more thing which is asymptotic equivalence in some sense asymptotically tight which is we write f of n is capital theta of g of n and we don't say capital because there is no small theta so it's theta of so this is big o of and this is big omega of so there's theta of if there exists two constants c1 and c2 that are both and they're both bigger than zero sorry I forgot they have to be bigger than zero both of them bigger than zero and then n zero and n such that well zero is smaller equal c1 times g of n smaller equal f of n smaller equal c2 times g of n so that means that we have both sides a smaller and a larger constant times g of n and f of n will be between them and this is called an asymptotically tight bound and for our t of n we don't have an asymptotically tight bound right because we have a lower bound that grows like n and we have an upper bound that grows like n squared we don't have an asymptotically tight bound for t of n now there's two more things which are asymptotic small o and small omega okay we say that f of n is little o of g of n little o of g of n if for every epsilon bigger than zero there exists an n zero in the natural numbers such that f zero is smaller or equal f of n is smaller or equal c times g of n epsilon sorry epsilon epsilon times g of n for all n greater or equal than zero so that's asymptotically insignificant so f of n is asymptotically insignificant with respect to g and we have the other notation the final one we say that f of n is small omega of g of n so little omega of if for every epsilon bigger than zero there exists an n well depends on how you want to do it we can do it with every epsilon let's let's not call it epsilon let's call it r which is for every capital r bigger than zero there exists an n zero and n such that f of n is greater or equal no r times g of n is greater or equal zero and this is small or equal f of n that basically means that f n gets arbitrarily large relative to g f n gets asymptotically arbitrary large or arbitrary large with respect to g of n so what would be examples well well t of n is of course small omega of n it will get arbitrarily large and no it's not it's small omega of one but we will very soon see a good example of small omega as well little omega as well little o and little omega so those are the important notations those are the symbols that we will actually consider right we will talk about properties of these O and capital O and small O notations next time there is one more thing that we need to present today which is merge sort so we'll talk about merge sort in a second no more okay there we are okay so this is the second idea which we talked about last time this is merge sort and merge sort has the following idea and this is how we do it so the idea is we take an array and break the array down into separate pieces two halves then we sort the two halves of the array and then we have two array parts that are both already sorted and then we merge them right so how can we merge already sorted arrays this is quite easy because we don't have to compare the elements of the arrays themselves we only have to compare the elements of the arrays with respect to each other so what we basically have is we have two stacks of cards and we do know that the two stacks of cards are already sorted by value so the only thing we have to do is we have to check the most cards whether the left one is smaller or the right one is smaller and then we start with the smaller one and put it at the end right so this is what merge is doing merge is merging these two arrays and then we call merge short on the two sub arrays and how do we sort the two sub arrays well we split them again in two and merge the two sub arrays so we call it recursively with itself and at the end when do we stop we stop when the array has size one because then it's already sorted so we don't have to do anything anymore so how does so this is a so-called divide and conquer algorithm so why is it divide because it divides our problem up and then it conquers the result so this is how merge sort works if we and then we call ourselves on the two sub arrays of size n over two well it doesn't need to be an even number if it's not an even number one of them will be just one shorter but doesn't matter right so we just split it up and then we have two arrays that we need to sort so we split it up again until we end up with single sized arrays and then we need to merge them together and merging them together as I told is only comparing the stack of cards right one after the other then we merge the results of these then we end up with four areas of size two that are already sorted and we can merge any two of them together to get two areas of size four that are already sorted and then we have to merge them together to get a large array of our original size that will be already sorted so this is basically the idea so how do we merge them together the merging operation is quite long on paper but it's not very difficult to understand so what do we have we have two arrays of two sizes of size nl and size nr and then we just produce two new arrays l and r and then we iterate through all of these arrays and make a copy of our arrays so this is the idea and then we keep index indices of the smallest remaining element in n and the smallest remaining element in r and then we keep an index of where we copy our new elements to which is k so we start with the final one and then we go through both arrays and that's what I said we only check whether the left one is bigger or the right one is bigger and depending on the bigger one we just fill our array so this is a stack of cards we have these two stack of cards and we build a large stack of cards and we just shuffle them and if one of them is empty the while loop will stop and then we will have the two while loops we will just copy the rest of the two stacks take these two stack of cards the one is the L array the other is the R array and then in the A array we have the stack of cards that is left and so we just pull them one card by the other always taking the smaller one to copy so that at the end we get an array and this is it for today I think it's 11.15 so you've endured me long enough for today and next week we're gonna analyze the amount of work that we use in order to do a merge sort and continue with our asymptotic notation and so I wish you a wonderful evening or a wonderful afternoon today and see you again next week bye bye and hopefully the recording has worked
