Okay, so welcome back to the lecture course. Oops. Yesterday we talked about the... Okay. Yesterday we talked about the difference between... the average running time or the average resource consumption of an algorithm and the expected resource consumption of an algorithm. I remind you that the difference basically is whether... Okay. Whether the algorithm is a deterministic algorithm with some sort of random data for which we don't have any knowledge about the probability distribution and the expected resource consumption is for randomized algorithms where the algorithm itself is responsible for randomization of the input. And in order to randomize input properly, we do have at least be able to produce a random permutation of an array. And the random permutation of an array, I wrote down a method yesterday which basically said we run through the array from the beginning towards the end and we always exchange the current element with a randomly chosen element that is from the current element to the end of the array. And so we do the exchanges. Now, I was a bit rushed yesterday at the end and so I overstepped my time. So probably we will do the stuff with the loop invariant again so the full proof. So now let's do the proof that this actually produces a random permutation. So what do we want to have at the end? We want to have that the whole array contains a permutation of the elements and that every permutation is equally likely, meaning that it has a probability to appear of 1 over n factorial. We introduced also something that we called a k permutation in an array and a k permutation in an array is basically an arbitrary extraction of different elements, of k different elements from the whole array. So the loop invariant says the loop invariant says that prior to iteration i the array that goes from 1 to i-1 contains a i-1 permutation of the whole array and every such i-1 permutation has probability n-1 plus 1 divided by n factorial has a probability to appear of n-i plus 1 factorial factorial divided by n factorial. Okay. And we've already discussed that at the beginning in the initialization phase when i is equal to 1 we don't have any array and if we set i to 1 we have the quotient of n factorial to n factorial which is 1 so the probability that no array contains nothing is 1. which is true. Okay. Great. Now let's do the maintenance step again a bit slower than yesterday. Okay. So if the first i-1 elements of the array contain an i-1 permutation basically meaning that all the elements are from the array between 1 and n and we take the i-th element and choose any other element between the i-th element and the last element and put it there it will still be a i permutation because we don't take elements that are outside of the array and we don't take an element again because all the others are chosen already the ones at the front are fixed so it's obvious that after iteration so before iteration i plus 1 a from 1 to i contains an i permutation of a now we have to think about probabilities so let's let's assume that the array a 1 to i contains some permutation so let a 1 to i be equal to some x1 x2 and so on x i minus 1 to x i right so it's it's i elements and let x1 to x i be these elements then of course since we only change the last element this here this part was already in a1 to a i minus 1 before the loop right so this was the content of a1 to i minus 1 before iteration i so this is an i minus 1 permutation and now the idea is probability we take we consider now two events okay event 1 is that these elements x1 to x i minus 1 are in a 1 to i minus 1 before iteration i right and the event e2 what's happening there are Okay, ah, that's the point. Okay. I'm not sure about the cleverness of that idea. So, it's dangerous actually. You know, when we had the old lecture rooms, when I started, the Mathematics Institute was still in the very old building where the physics is now, Boltzmanngasse. They also had these kind of blackboards, which were in principle, only the blackboards were replaced, but the lecture room was very old. I think it was from the 19th century. And they also had these three kind of blackboards that could slide up and down. And then they had a big stick with a hook on it where you can just put the things up and down and it would be there. Hooks never entangle themselves so that you can't get the blackboards apart anymore. Anyway, so, this is the first. The second event is that AI is, so Xi is chosen. Xi is chosen for AI in iteration. Right? So, this is the second event. And at the end, the array after the I-th iteration can only be X1 to Xi if both events happen. Right? So, we have to compute what is the probability that E1 and E2 happen at the same time. They're not independent. And so, we have to take our definition, basically. So, what is this? This is the probability that E2 happens given that E1 has happened and times the probability of E1. We do know the probability of E1 because this is in our loop invariant. So, we know that the probability of E1 is N minus I plus 1 factorial divided by N factorial. Okay? So, now is a question. What is the probability of E1, of E2 given E1? Well, what do we have to do? We have to choose an element in the remaining array. And we have to choose exactly one element and all of them are equally likely. So, how many elements are still there? Well, it's exactly N minus I plus 1 elements. So, the chance of this happening is 1 over N minus I plus 1. So, now we can multiply these two. And what we get is we get rid of one of the factors, the last factor of the factorial, meaning the factor before stays the last one, which says that this will be N minus I factorial. And the N factorial stays where it is. And, well, that basically means that we've shown that this permutation happens exactly with the probability of N minus I factorial divided by N factorial, which is just the correct number if we plug in I plus 1 for I. So, that's why the loop invariant stays in the maintenance section. Now, we need to discuss the termination criterion. So, termination. Well, the loop terminates. Why does it terminate? Because it has fixed number of iterations. So, loop terminates. Don't forget that in the exam. Okay, I tell you again. It's important if you're doing a loop invariant, don't forget to say at least that the loop ends. This is an important fact. Just from experience, half of you usually forget that. So, please don't. Okay, the loop terminates since it's finite. Since it's fixed, since the number of iterations is fixed. It's fixed. And now we need to show what happens. And afterwards we have that A1 to N contains an N permutation. which is just a permutation. And the permutation. And every permutation has probability has probability N minus N plus 1 factorial divided by N factorial. but this is 1 factorial which is 1 which is 1 over N factorial. So, indeed every permutation has the same probability 1 over N factorial. And so, indeed we have an algorithm that permutes a sequence randomly. Remember that because this is an important algorithm. you will need this a lot in your data. So, usually it's supported in Python also. And what's the effort of the algorithm? Well, the effort of the algorithm is order of N. Because you run through the area once, you choose a random number in every step and you take one swap in every step. So, it's fast. Great. Now, the next thing is we end the basic math part more or less of the theory. The next thing we now start with algorithms and data structures. So, that's that's what the the lecture is about. And we start with very, very basic algorithms which is sorting. So, why do we start by sorting stuff? Well, a large number of data science operations are basically sorting based operations. And sorting based operations have been an algorithmic since even since before computers have come to the place. So, sorting is since ancient Egypt or even before. So, once bureaucracy was invented, sorting was invented. And I think we only know that because then written records about sorting started to appear. It's very likely that sorting was even done before that. But latest when Sumerians or Egyptians or so started to do bureaucracy, we have evidence that sorting was necessary. And it hasn't vanished since then. So, this is very important for us. And the question is does sorting have other benefits, right, than bringing stuff into an order? Well, it helps often to do other algorithmic methods faster. Once, so, why did the ancient bureaucrats do sorting? Well, because it speeds up searching a lot, right? Because once you sorted something, you change a search algorithm complexity basically from an order of n by going through everything to an order of logarithm of n by subdividing your search space into smaller and smaller pieces. And that basically means you can change search time from a linear effort to logarithmic effort which speeds things up a lot. So, once you sorted everything, you can do repetitive operation on your data usually much faster. But this also gives you another thing because it tells you that once you have a sorting algorithm where if you can prove that your algorithms after sorting the data run considerably faster than before, you might also get information on how fast you can do other tasks on the data at most first. Because often you can prove that sorting speeds up the remaining data operations by so much that the sorting basically becomes the most effort in your data handling. But that also means that it puts if you can prove some sort of lower bound on the big omega on the effort it takes to sort the data this will also be a lower bound on the effort it takes to do other operations with your data. And so therefore sorting is some sort of minimal important data science operation in the beginning. So there is another thing about the algorithms we learn here. Of course we will talk about sorting numbers because they're easy. But you do not the algorithms work whenever you have a totally ordered set. It doesn't matter whether they are real numbers or integers or something else. There's only very rare that you need the properties of the numbers themselves. Sometimes we will need properties of the numbers and then I will explicitly mention it. But if I don't explicitly mention that we use properties of numbers then you can apply the sorting of course to everything you want. You can sort strings you can sort what not keys countries if you have a ranking of them or whatever. you can sort whatever you love as long as you have a total order on that. Once you have a total order that's what we abstract away. We will replace totally ordered set by numbers. But the same algorithms apply to other totally ordered sets. The first thing. The second thing is usually you don't you've experienced this in Excel or any other. I don't know whether this is still taught it's cool or whether it's taught everywhere it's cool. But at least my children were still well told. I was not going to say forced but told to do some table calculation programs in some of there. But what you can see is and this is probably instructive you can choose a large table and then choose a column and then say just order the table by that column and the column is telling you the keys but the rest of the table is usually telling you other data that is important and this is also known since Sumerian or whatever ancient times right you probably order by name or by lot number or whatever to find stuff fast but then of course the entry there contains a lot of additional data and so usually we don't sort the numbers themselves but we sort records where a key in these records tells you the sorting order but the important data rarely is what you sort by the important data is usually in a side car somewhere so these arrays that we're talking about we only talk and this is also important to understand so we talk about the sorting algorithm and we only talk about sorting the keys we don't talk about sorting the rest of the array if we talk about the rest of the you have to do when you implement the stuff right you have to decide whether the side car is small enough that you can pack everything into one array or whether you have pointers to data that are somewhere like in libraries you know library system is now not no longer so interesting because usually you look in the internet and then it tells you where it is it tells you where it is the important thing right and this search algorithm does nothing but search for data and this data is also sorted by author and other keys in the database so what we are doing here is not only basic algorithm theory but also something you will need later which is databases right because databases work the same way you have a large blob of data which is somewhere and then the organization matters right also on your computer if you store your files somewhere the file system the data is not organized the same way on your hard drive or on your it's no longer hard drive usually it's an SSD or even an SD card or just blob data in your phone but you have all your pictures there and or images there and videos and whatnot whatsapp messages or instagram messages or whatever but none of that is stored in some regular fashion right that's just blobs of data that are anywhere on your device and the only thing that actually really matters is the organization of that stuff and this is usually done by sorting indices into the data and by having pointers that actually tell you where the data really lies so usually you have some sort of something that points to where it is so like in a library if you get a book from the library if you ever get a book from the library then it has some strange number printed on its outer I don't know what it's called in English it's called back on the back of the book there is there is a number printed which is somewhat strange or a combination of numbers and letters saying something like 3BA 79 5 or so and this number is always some sort of unknown clue but usually it just tells you in what shelf in what big shelf the book is and where it approximately is and the books are sorted by the last number and the combination of numbers and letters tells you where the shelf is and the shelves are also organized in areas and that's where the numbers come from so that the librarian can go there fast and pick out the book without searching through the whole library for something and so all of these things happen at the same time and what I wanted to tell you is this is implementation stuff that you need to think about right and it depends on many application related things like where is the data is it in a database is it on a hard drive is it in a real thing like a book or a replacement part somewhere so this is up to you but you have to think about it if you implement this stuff okay so this is important this is also data science as it's working right it's not constructing algorithms that's the mathematical part but thinking about how to organize that later this is also part of your job it's not it doesn't have to be always part of your job because you have to talk to the people who are actually doing their application right so if you are organizing a huge storage space then usually stuff is put wherever there is free space and then these pointers change because stuff might get moved around from A to B but this doesn't matter you only have to think about that but this doesn't involve sorting because this only involves to know where the data or the objects actually are right the sorting just tells you how to properly organize the data that tells you where the objects are okay and we will only be concerned about that we only be concerned about bureaucracy I know that bureaucracy is very annoying but sometimes it's important and in algorithm theory it's important so we are doing the bureaucracy now so we do the first thing about the bureaucracy sorting okay so what we will do is we will add sorting algorithms as they come by chapter by chapter and during that organization we will also try to introduce data structures that help us with our algorithms so we've already learned a bit about sorting we've analyzed in the that's why we chose the sorting algorithms for analysis because there's a basic so we had two of them right we analyzed our standard insertion sort that is the one and the other one was merge sort and we saw that insertion sort takes an order of n squared operations and merge sort takes a theta of n log n operations but the two algorithms had a very important distinguishing property which I did not talk about because we only talked about runtime right so talking about runtime insertion sort is much slower than merge sort but there is a second important component in computer science which is memory space insertion sort has the big advantage that it takes only one additional data item and everything else is done in place merge sort takes a copy of the whole array and then sorts it so it doubles the amount of memory during the algorithm so merge sort doesn't work in place merge sort uses an external area of the same size space and so if it comes to storage space you would always figure out whether you have enough space on your computer right so you might if you want to sort 10 terabytes of data and you have an 11 terabyte disk you'd probably not use merge sort because you just don't have any space where you can store your array and the question is can we do better can we do an in place sort that is as fast as merge sort but has the same memory capacity requirements as insertion sort right so this will be one of the questions we will ask ourselves and in order to do so we will invent a new data structure in the next chapter then we will also talk about other things so this is heap sort so we will start with heap sort then we'll talk about quick sort and then we will do other sorting algorithms that actually use properties of numbers so if you know something about your keys you can do faster than if you don't know anything about your keys for example if you know that your keys are more or less numbers and they are numbers that basically are permutations plus a bit then you can be faster even than quick sort accounting sort this is something we will discuss and then the other thing will be if there are numbers and have other properties we'll talk about this this is redic sort this is something we'll talk about and then we will also talk about the bucket sort which is a special kind of sorting and bucket sort actually something that many of you probably even do if they have to sort things by hand so I don't know many people I don't know whether you too but many people have when they were children or even now I don't know whether they're available everywhere but here in Austria they definitely are whenever you have I don't know a or basically you want to collect stuff and then if you want to collect stuff you have to organize that and you have to exchange the things and usually if you have I don't know 200 stickers and you got them you have to bring them in order somehow especially when we want to exchange them so how do you sort them well usually what is done you put them you just take them and put them in bins of tens so where you put all the tens on the first place all the twenties on the second all the thirties on the third and then take them and only sort the tens then sort the twenties and then put them on top of each other right so this is a very clever idea of sorting which is basically a way to put them in buckets first and then to sort the buckets and then put the buckets on top of each other so things like that can also be done in computer science of course and so we'll talk about these things and we'll also talk about order statistics so what is order statistics well basically sometimes you don't want to find sometimes you want to find elements of an array right and there are things you could do by sorting for example if you want to have the largest element of an array you could do a sorting first and then take sorting by size and then take the last one right this is a possibility to get the largest element of an array however you can do that faster as you know because you just can go through the array and check whether you are bigger than what you found before which is linear in time but sometimes you don't need so for example for k nearest neighbor search or things like that you need the k biggest things or the kth biggest thing or so and this is about order statistics and we'll talk about this as well in this chapter okay so we're now with ordering and we start with the first one and the first one is heap sort so we'll start with heap sort which is chapter six okay and there's a warning before we start to talk about it so I don't know how much programming experience you already have so there will be some of you who've done a lot of programming already some of you haven't there is a warning sometimes in computer science you will have the same word has you will find out that the same word has two different meanings and one of the worst of that is heap and there are two very very fundamentally different meanings of the word heap so the first thing is about organizing your memory and the second is about the data structure so here in algorithms and data structure we will talk about the data structure heap and not about the memory organization heap so maybe so who of you knows how CPUs work okay one two three okay so just a quick intro okay so CPU the CPU is the main chip of your thing unless you're doing a lot of AI because then the GPU is relevant but you also need the CPU to do the GPU stuff but the CPU is the central processing unit of your computer and nowadays it has a lot of cores and every core is doing work and so every core is doing instructions right every so how does it work there is a special well a CPU contains internal memory several layers of internal memory but the most important internal memory for programming are the so called registers the registers of a CPU are ultra ultra fast memory that is directly in the CPU and it is as fast as the CPU itself it's special in the very few on most of the CPUs you have less than 25 or 30 registers where you can store data and there is one very important register which is the so-called instruction pointer right okay so every every CPU the CPU does not do Python programs it doesn't do C programs not at all CPU works on machine code right instruction code instruction code is something quite difficult to grasp because it's only numbers what you can do is you can display the numbers and give them a meaning by using mnemonics short letter abbreviations for these numbers which is called assembler code okay assembler code is a one by one representation of these numbers for the CPU and what the CPU usually does it looks at and so memory inside a computer is a large blob it's completely unstructured okay it's just starts with zero and goes to the end of your of your code of your installed memory and I'm talking about random access memory now about RAM which is one of the things if you buy a computer it tells you it has 12 gigabytes of RAM and then I don't know SSD space a terabyte or something like that or 8 gigabytes of RAM or whatever so this goes from zero to 8 times 10 to the power of 30 which is the end of the 8 gigabytes right so it's basically 8 gigabytes means 10 2 to the power of 33 which is something like 8 billion something okay so then the CPU who is still able to follow me everybody that's great so once once I'm talking too much and I'm overlaying so the registers there are special registers there's a special class of registers whose only responsibility is to point to various positions within this large blob so they contain a large number and usually they are now for modern CPUs they're 64 bits in length so they could in principle address everything from 0 to 2 to the 64 which is a lot more than you can afford installing into your computer okay so they're only responsible for that and one of the responsible things is the so called instruction pointer so the instruction pointer points to somewhere in the memory and this tells the CPU it reads the data that is in there in their instruction register and then it interprets the numbers that are in there and one such number might mean move from the let's say AX register that points to some memory place somewhere take this amount this the data that is in there and move it into register B right the other one might be take register B and register C and add them another one might be add one to register E and things like that so those are the stuff that your CPU is doing all the time it's doing it very fast but these instructions are very very simple right there are specialized registers for floating point operations and everything but you don't need to know that now there is another very important thing in the CPU for working which is the so-called stack pointer okay so the stack pointer is a special area inside your large blob that gives your assembler program local storage right so it tells you where your local variables are so whenever you write the program and you add a local variable then this usually goes to the stack and whenever you do a call of another function the CPU does nothing but put the stack somewhere else then you get a new area and then it puts the stack somewhere else and so on and when it returns from that subroutine it will discard everything which is above and go back to your original stack so this is the stack pointer so you have and this is important for recursive operations as well because every time you do a recursive call you will get a new stack for local variables so that the local variables of the first call and the local variables of the second call won't interfere with each other right and so if you have a loop that calls itself continuously at some point you will run out of stack space and some programming languages will just tell you stack overflow and then it will go away that's usually when you do too many recursive calls okay so this is the one area of work where you are the second area of work is the so called heap space heap space is data space that you can access from everywhere it's just a large blob of data somewhere and this is also usually unorganized there is something in your programming language that puts large things not on the stack because the stack is only usually quite tiny but it puts it somewhere else it only puts pointers on the stack and puts the blobs somewhere else and it counts how many pointers still point to your data right it always keeps a count on how often this data thing is referenced and at the end it will whenever a data point is no longer referenced it will silently discard it and since this takes a lot of time it will not do this all the time but it will go through that whenever the heap space becomes small and this is a so-called garbage collection garbage collection means run through the heap space and throw away everything that is no longer needed put it in the garbage and discard it and then sometimes reorganize the space so this! is the first meaning of heap which is usually done in all modern languages it's like in Java you can do these things in Python you can do these things in Julia in most of the modern languages not in C++ they don't have a heap you have to organize the heap yourself if you want to have one but in all the higher languages nowadays they have this heap data structure and you read something that tells you the data is present on the heap or things like that this is not what we are talking about today okay so this is a very crude introduction to how memory is organized right so there are other things like a memory management unit that tells you which program can access which parts of your memory and things like that so you don't have other interference but this is how memory is organized you usually have a stack and you have a heap and the heap is the large blob where the large data goes and the stack is the organization of your recursion calls of your sub routines and things like that okay now we will talk about the data structure heap and the data structure heap is a way to organize a binary tree okay so since we have not yet talked about trees and probably haven't talked about trees in your introduction yet or did you know I don't think so we'll talk about binary trees first so what is a binary tree well a binary tree is a special kind of graph and I don't know whether you do any graph theory later but likely there will be some graph theory so I will only do the stuff that everybody can always understand so trees by the way in computer science usually grow from the top to the bottom so the gravity is the ceiling in computer science so and every tree as you know has a root no I know trees have lots of roots but in computer science trees have one root so they have a root and the nodes are usually drawn by putting circles somewhere okay a binary tree means that every node within the tree which is a branch basically can have at most two children children are the nodes that emanate from there so a binary tree can have at most two children a ternary tree can have at most three children and so on there are also other trees that can have as many children as you like but we are now concerned with binary trees only and this can go on so you can go you can subdivide this thing further some of them will have probably only one child some of them so this is something that is a binary tree so there are no circles in a tree so this is very important you can never go back without tracing back the same route so you can never find a path that doesn't hit any of the edges twice and go back to where you came from so the most important thing about the tree is that it is circle free so it does not contain a closed loop anywhere there are nodes that don't have any children they are called the leaves of the tree they are the leaves and this is the root and they are the nodes of the tree so all are nodes or vertices and the connection between two nodes of vertices are called edges why do we talk about trees because trees can be used for sorting stuff you can put now you can fill in numbers in this tree and one possibility to do so is you can for example fill numbers in a tree in such a way that the parent must have a bigger number than both of it than all of its children minimum this is one possibility there's a maximum binary tree there's also minimum binary tree where the parents must have smaller entries than the children and depending on whether you are more interested in finding maxima or more interested in finding minima it's better to organize your tree either with the maximum property or with the minimum property so I will put up a projection now oh come on this doesn't want to work this is the annoying lecture room okay okay that's the wrong one that's the right one okay so it's just another picture of a binary tree okay so the important thing is binary trees have a nice property if they satisfy the following requirement oh yeah of course sorry thank you thanks for reminding me okay there we are okay so this is a very special binary tree because this binary tree has the property that it's more or less filled so what it has not is an edge like in this example so what you can see is here this node has grandchildren so it has descendants that are beyond the children but it does not have two children so what we want to have is we want to have a sort of tree where the structure is like this so all the nodes that are that are not yet filled that don't have two children are organized like this so they start from the left and then they you can't have things like that you can't have things like this does not have children but this has children and this has only one child but the child has sub children this is a perfectly valid binary tree but it is not a binary binary trees that can be organized into a heap are of this structure because when they are of this structure they can be organized in an array without ever storing the edges okay so this is the important fact so you can always do this without storing the edges so how can you do that well what you can basically do is you can enumerate like there on top of the circles you have the indices into the arrays so I don't know well it doesn't matter okay so what you can see is you number them from top to bottom and from left to right so first number is all is the root right the second number is the root is the level one nodes the third number then after you've numbered all the level one nodes you number all the level two nodes and then you number all the level three nodes because if you do that the only thing you have to know is what is the actual size of the heap so how much elements does your tree contain so now you can see the entries and now we can try to figure out whether we can establish how we get the indices of the entries in our array because if you understand it once then you will see it forever okay now let's see the root of the tree obviously has index one and don't ask me why a book about computer science uses all the indices in areas starting with one and not with zero which is true for almost every computer science but perhaps they want to make it more difficult to implement this stuff so you always have to think about that but apart from that it's probably the best book about algorithms okay so let's see how we can find our children so root has number one right and what is the child of number one the child the left child of number one is two which is two times one and the right child of number one is three which is two times one plus one so let's see what are the children of two the children of two of four and five four is two times two and five is two times two plus one and three is two times three is six and two times three plus one is seven and then we have two times four is eight two times four plus one is nine and two times five is ten so apparently it's quite easy to find the children of a given note because the left child is just multiplying the index by two and the right child is multiplying the index by two and adding one. Sorry about that. Okay, just a second. This is important. I'll be back in a second. I'll be back in a second. Okay, so this is how it's organized. So you can basically go from the entry to its children by a very simple arithmetic operation on the indices and the other way around as well. Because if you want to find the parent of a given note, you just multiply by two, you divide by two and round down. So this is also if you divide five by two and round down, you get two. If you divide four by two, it's anyway two, you don't have to round down. So just by a floor operation on the half, you go from a child to its parent and the other way around. And there is another thing which is important to see. So this is the one that you have 10 elements within this array, right? And starting from half of that, starting from index six, six. So if you take the half, round it down and plus one, you have six. All of them are leaves of the tree. Right? So basically half of the space of the arrays only consists of leaves, which don't have any children, which is clear. Because just imagine one child is multiplying that stuff by two. So if multiplication by two goes beyond the heap size, then of course you are a leaf. And both of these things are important. So it's very easy to go from an old to its child. And it's very easy to go from the child to the parent. And it's quite simple to see which of the elements have to be leaves. So what is a heap therefore? A heap is basically a binary tree, but it's not written or not implemented as a binary tree, but it's implemented as an array whose structure represents a binary tree. Okay? So that's what a heap is. Now we need to discuss what are the basic operations on a heap. Okay? So those are the operations that we know. So the parent is dividing by two and rounding down. The left child is multiplying by two, the right child is multiplying by two and adding one. And what we have, and this is important, is we have two possibilities to arrange a heap, as we have two possibilities to arrange such a binary tree. And this is either as a max heap or as a min heap. The max heap says that the entry, the key of the parent, so the element, the parent element has to be greater equal to the child element. So every element is small or equal to its parent in a max heap. Of course, this is true for every element, but the root, the root has to be the maximum element, it doesn't have a parent. And in a min heap, it's just the other way around. Every parent has to be small or equal to the entry. Okay? So max heap, parents are big, min heap, parents are small. Okay? So this is what the heap property tells you. Now, we need to understand how to organize an array into a heap. Okay? So we have an array, and the question is, and we will come to sorting a bit later, but the first thing what we want to do is we want to reorganize our array into a heap structure. This is not yet completely organized. This is not yet completely sorted, but it's somewhat sorted, right? So it's halfway sorted because it tells you a relation. It introduces a relation between all of the elements. You at least know that if you go from a parent to a child, you have to become smaller. Right? Okay. So, and this is the next interesting question. Can we compute, can we produce an algorithm that takes an array and converts it into a heap? Okay? So this is the first algorithm we'll talk about. And the first algorithm we'll talk about is heapify. And before we write it down, I'll just give you a picture again. Because if you see there's a picture, and you always have to picture it in the binary tree. So let's assume that we are up there. And this is our organization. So we have our tree, and we pick out one element, one index in the array. And we want to make sure that the subtree, the subtree is just a tree. If we forget everything, if we just cut the edge to the parent, then we get another tree. Why? Because we don't introduce circles by cutting edges. So if we don't have a circle before, after cutting an edge, we don't have a circle afterwards. So this is the so-called subtree. So what we want to do is we want to make a heap out of the subtree that starts at the blue node. At the blue node. Yeah? So how do we figure out whether we do have a heap? Well, basically what we need to do is we check whether both of the subtree that emanate from child left and child right are heaps. And if they are, we only have to check whether both of the elements on top of my subtree are actually smaller than I am. Because if they are, then all the properties are satisfied. So we check whether the entry that is in blue is actually, is actually, we are max heapifying. So we want to make sure that whether the entry that is in blue is greater or equal to is greater or equal to the entries that are below. And what we will assume is that the subtrees are heaps. Okay? So the subtrees are heaps. But the, so are properly ordered binary tree. They have the max property. But not necessarily everything. So what do we do first? We check whether our entry is greater or equal to the left and the right entry. Because if this is the case, we're finished. Because then we already have heaps. If this is not the case, then one of these three elements has to be the biggest. Right? And this is the one with which we exchange ourselves. So we check which of the three elements, which of the two elements down there is the bigger one, and we exchange the two. And then we know that the one we have not exchanged with is still a heap. Because we haven't changed anything. The only what, the only that might have changed is the new subtree. So what we can do is we can recursively call max heapify on the next subtree. Which is what we've done here, right? We've, we've, we've figured out among 14, 7 and 2. The 14 is the biggest one. So we exchange the 4 with the 14. And then the right path, 14, 7 and 1 still is, has the heap property. And we have to figure out, and what is also known is that all the elements now beyond the 14 on the left hand side will be smaller than 14. 14. And so we can call max heapify on this small subtree that consists of 4, 2 and 8. And then we, again, figure out which one is the biggest. The biggest is again 8. We exchange the 4 and the 8. And then we move down. But then we don't have any children and so we finished. So the recursion always stops when we're finished. Right? So this is the procedure. This procedure is quite simple when we write it down as an algorithm. Okay? So how do we write it down as an algorithm? Well, it max heapify is called on the array because we've done it in the array. Whether it's an array or an array or a, or a, or a tree doesn't matter because we've abstracted away the array indices. We've just used left and right. So what is it doing first? So what is max heapify? It's being called with the tree array and with an index into the array. So a position of the array, right? So what is it doing first? It's taking the left element, which is L, and the right element, which is R. And then it checks the following things, right? It checks which of those is the largest. So it first compares whether the left is bigger than A of I and whether the left is in the heap, right? Being small or equal heap size means we are in the heap. Otherwise we're somewhere else. We have already passed the tree and we are not longer in the tree. So this is an index to an element which is not in the tree. If it is true, then we figure out whether it's bigger than our entry. And if it's bigger than our entry, we just remember that the largest we found is L. Then we do the same. And otherwise it's I. Otherwise we are still the largest. Then we do the same for the right. So we check whether the right is bigger than the largest. And if the right is bigger than the largest, we remember that the largest is right. And then we just make sure and figure out whether we are the largest. If we are the largest, we're finished. We don't have to do anything because then we have property and we still are a heap. And we are not the largest. Then we have to exchange ourselves with the largest. And then we will call max heapify at the position of the largest because this is where we have been copied to. And this is the full recursive operation of max heapify. And the question now is how much effort is max heapify? Right. So how fast can we do that? Well, this is basically a recursive operation and we could think using the master theorem in order to analyze it. And this is something we can do. So let's think about the running time. Well, what we do know is that the running time depends on the worst case running time of max heapify. Let T of n be the worst case running time of max heapify. Well, in every iteration, we at most have to exchange two things, which is theta of one effort. We don't have to prepare anything. We don't have to cut anything. So it's always theta of one. Now, the size of the subtree, the worst thing that can happen is that the left subtree is double the size of the right subtree, which means that the worst thing that can happen is that we have a subtree that is two thirds the size of what we had before. So that means that T of n is at most T of two thirds times n plus some theta of one. And now what we can do is we can invoke the master theorem. Because basically the same thing. The master theorem tells us that T of n is theta of LGN. And this is a homework to do that, to figure out whether this is really true. Okay. So what is also important is that this depends on the height of the note. So what is the height of a note? This is how far it is up from the lowest leaf below it. So this is also important to know if so the height of a note. So the root has the highest height. So this is the number of parents of children. I know the number of let's write that the longest, the largest. number of hops it takes to get to a leaf. And T of n is capital O of H. So whenever we have a note, it's the height of a note. So the effort. So T from a note. It's H of the note. It's the order of H of the note. This is something we need a bit later. Okay. So that means it takes logarithmic time to take a note and get a heap from an array. Basically that means that we can take the question now is how long does it take to make a heap out of a whole array? Right. Because that is max heapify takes already existing heaps and just adds a single element or updates a single element. So what we are now interested in is how much time does it take to actually get a heap done. Okay. So we want to build a heap out of our array. And here we are taking the second thing that we have been talking about. So what is the time by the way? It's 11.03. Okay. Perfect. So what is the second? Now we want to build a heap from everything in our array. So how can we do that? So what we know already is that if we have N elements in our array, we want to build a heap out of all of these N elements. So we want to rearrange all of our elements so that afterwards they represent the heap. We've been talking about the fact that all the elements after index size divided by two rounded down definitely are leaves. And leaves are heaps because they only contain a single element. So what we do now in our mind is we rearrange our whole array just in our mind as a binary tree. We don't do anything yet, but we just rearrange it as a binary tree. But the numbers inside the binary tree are just distributed randomly. It's just anyway. They're not yet a heap. They're not half the max property, but they still represent the tree by the same operations that we had before, right? Halving the index gives you the parent. Multiplying the index by two gives you the left side. Multiplying the index by two and adding one gives you the right side. But it's not yet a heap. It's just something. But what we do know is that all the elements that are beyond the half of the array, they are leaves of that tree. So they are already heaps by themselves because they contain only a single element. The subtree of a leaf is only a single element. So it satisfies the max property because there is nothing to compare. Right? So what we're doing now is we are going from the element before that, which already has at least one child, to the beginning of the array. And we will make sure that we get the heap property done for every entry. So we're going the reverse, meaning that we're going up node by node by node by node until we're at the root. And we're rearranging everything down there, everything as a heap. So we are calling max heapify for every single position, making sure that all the subtrees one by one become heaps. And so by the property of max heap, when we are at the end, we will have heapified the root node, which means all of the tree is basically has the max property and so our array will be a heap. Okay? So this is why this is so simple, because of the structure that we've been discussing. So this is only three lines of code. Now, why does it work? Basically, I've explained it already, because everything that is beyond half is already a heap because it's a leaf. And then because we're going from the back to the front, we're going up in levels. And so the maintenance of the loop invariant. The loop invariant just says that everything up starting at index i is a heap. And this is something we're doing anyway by calling max heapify at every position. So we're making sure that everything is a heap. So this is the maintenance idea. So the question now is, so this is how it works. This is a large collection of pictures. Let me get this a bit smaller so that we can see everything at once. So we have an arbitrary array arranged. And as you can see, we don't have to arrange the leaves. Because they are, so if you look at the indices, the indices from 6 to 10, they are already leaves. So we can leave them out because they are all subheaps. Now the next entry will be 5. The entry 5 is a subtree that is now really a tree because it has a child. And so we need to call max heapify on this small subtree that starts with the blue node. But this is already a heap because 16 is bigger than 7. And so we can keep it as it is, right? The next index would be 4, which is the small subtree down there, which is the 2, 14, and 8 subtree. But of course, this is not a heap. So we need to do something in max heapify, meaning we have to exchange the 2 and the 14. Giving this subtree down there, which contains the 14, the 2, and the 8. And we will next call heapify on node 3, which is up there in blue. And here we have the same thing again, right? This is not a heap. So we have to exchange the 3 by the 10, giving the subtree that is depicted on the right in D. And then we have to call max heapify on 2. This is now a larger subtree. So we have to do a lot of calculations. First, we exchange the 1 with the 16. And then we have to exchange the 1 with the 7. And so after exchanging that, we get the 3 that is down there below, where the 16 has moved up to where the 1 was. And the 1 has moved down to position 10, right? And then we have the final call. The final call is for the root node, which is index 1, which is the 4. And then we call max heapify again. So we have to exchange the 4 by the 16. Then we have to exchange the 4 by the 14. And then we have to exchange the 4 by the 8 with the 8. And then we end up with our 3 from before. So this is how max heapify works. And now the question is, what is the effort of doing that, right? So what is the effort of doing that? Okay, so let me see. The effort of doing that is the following. So the simplest thing would be to say, well, we're iterating through n half elements. And we're always calling a logarithm of n effort, meaning that it definitely looks like it'd be n log n. And the point is, it isn't. Well, n log n is true. It's big O of n log n. This is simple. But what we've seen now, when we talked about this, is the max heapify operations get bigger and bigger. Right? The first max heapify operation was very simple because it was called on very shallow trees. It's only getting bigger once we reach the root node. So the whole logarithm of n effort is not everything up there. But it starts with very small trees, which are almost negligible and so on and so on. So not all of the n elements are actually really counting. So let's calculate the effort of max heapify. So let's go back. Let's go back to the blackboard. Okay. Now. So build heap. So how fast can we build a heap from an array? So in order to do that, we need to analyze what we have to work on. So the nice thing is, if we call max heapify, we have to think of what I said before. Max heapify is not only lg of n of the size of the tree, but it's on the order of the height of the node where we are currently. And so we need to count the height of the tree. And since the binary tree spreads wide, there are many, many more nodes that have small heights. So the height of the node, the number of nodes who have shallow heights also grows exponentially. All right. It grows by two to the n. So the number of nodes that have high height is also somehow logarithmic, depending on the number of nodes that we have. And so let's think what we can think about. Okay. So what we know is the cost of max heap. So T of n is also small or equal the sum from the height. And the height, of course, of the tree is bounded by the logarithm of n rounded down. It starts with zero. Those are all the leaves. And then round it down. By how many nodes are in there? Well, that's also quite simple to count. It's two divided by two to the h plus one. So that's the number of nodes that have height h. And then we have a constant times h because that's the effort, the big O. So this is the constant that we have in every height. Okay. Now we can bound to this. So this is the number of nodes, the maximum number of nodes of height h. Right. Why? Because we have a number of nodes. We have a number of nodes of height zero, which are the leaves. And at most two leaves have one parent. Right. So that's basically halving them. And once we're full, then it's always halving them. Right. So the nodes that are one step higher are half the nodes that have height one less. So this is why the two to the h plus one is h plus one is there. Okay. Now we can bound that by just dividing by less. So this is smaller or equal to sum of h equals zero to round it down log n of n divided by two to the h times c times h. Okay. So this is equal to the sum of h equals zero to the log n rounded down. h divided by two to the h. So this is almost a geometric sum. It's actually some sort of, so how do you calculate that? Usually you've done that in analysis. But the idea is the following. You just write the following sum. So sum k equals zero to infinity x to the k divided by two to the k. Right. You call this number f. You call this number f of x. So this is quite simple. Because this is a geometric series. Right. So this is one divided by one minus x over two. If x is smaller, small enough. So that x over two is smaller than one. Okay. Now, smaller than two, sorry. Now, we can calculate what f prime of x is. This is a power series. So you probably learned in analysis that you can differentiate power series by differentiating the terms. So this is k zero to infinity. So this is k zero to infinity. And then we have k times x to the k minus one. And so we have to start at one here divided by two to the k. Right. Well, this sounds very nice already by what we're talking about. So because here we can also start with one. Because h is zero is zero. Then this is anyway zero. And so this is therefore this thing differentiated. Which is one divided by one minus x over two squared. Times the interior derivative which is one over two. And so f prime of one. This is the same as the sum k equals one to infinity. k divided by two to the k. Is therefore one half times one minus one minus one half squared. This is four. Half is two. If I'm not completely wrong. So this is a constant. Depending on the logarithm of n at most. No, this is not. This is a constant. So this is smaller than cn times the sum of h equals one to infinity of h divided by two to the h. And this is a constant. So therefore t of n is o of n. And therefore max heapify. So building a heap out of an array is an order of n operation asymptotically. And I think time's up for today. I wish you a very nice time. Until next week. See you for sorting with heaps next week. Bye-bye. Thank you.
