Okay, great. Now most of the things seem to work, do they? Of course they don't. Now they do. So welcome back to the lecture course. Sorry for delay, but I had to finish my exercises class. So we're currently in the midst of talking about order statistics and how to get them. And we want to analyze the algorithm SELECT that calculates the i-order statistics of a given array. And it's a recursive procedure. That's also something we talked about yesterday. And we want to analyze that algorithm. And this is a deterministic algorithm that can calculate the i-order statistics of a given array in theta of n steps. So let's look at that procedure once more. So yesterday we started by discussing that the first 10 lines, the first while loop, actually, let's think it through. It does the following. So it iterates the while loop until the remaining array that we need to consider is a multiple of five. So this is repeated as long as r minus p plus one module of five is not equal to zero. And why does it actually stop the first array? Well, we increment p by one in every iteration, which is in line nine. And so therefore we decrement r minus p plus one by one in every iteration. And so there will be a time when this is a multiple of five. So the worst thing that can happen is that it is not a multiple of five, but it's module of five. It is four. Right. Because if it's five is not possible module of five, because then it's zero again. Did you learn about remainder classes in them? Yes. Great. So this loop, therefore, is executed at most four times. So what is it doing? It's checking whether it's going through all the other elements except for the first one. And whenever the new element we're looking at is smaller than the first element, we put the new element to the front. So after the for loop in line four, we are sure that a of p, which is the first element of the array, contains the smallest element among all the ones that we consider. So this contains the smallest element of the whole array. Right. So we do this four times. And so we four times compare at most four times, compare an element with all the rest of the array. And we always shuffle the smallest element to the front. So after this for loop, we can check whether i, so the i-th order statistic is equal to one. Because if it's equal to one, then we're looking for the smallest element. And after this iteration, a p will contain the smallest element. So we can return it, which happens in line six and seven. And if i is bigger than one, we know that this one element, a p, is below our i-th order statistic. So we can exclude it from our consideration. We can shorten the array by one by increasing p by one and decreasing e by one. Because if we want to have the third smallest element and we are disregarding the first, which is the smallest element, we are then looking for the second smallest element in the rest of the array because the smallest element is already gone. So this is why we decrease i by one in line 10 and increase p by one in line nine. So after we have finished that array, either we found the correct order statistics already, if it's in the first few elements. And if not, we're looking for the i-th order statistics in the rest of the array. And the rest of the array now has a size that is a multiple of five. Okay, but that means that we now go through the whole array in groups of five. And so how many groups of five are there? This is calculated in line 11, where we divide the size of the array by five, right? So this is the number of groups we have. And then the next thing is we go through all the groups. And how are the groups organized? Well, the first group consists of AP, AP plus G, AP plus 2G, AP plus 3G and AP plus 4G. So we consider really the groups and among the groups, we order the elements. And then we go through all the groups one by one. So the spacing of two elements, which we consider to be in the same group, is G. So two of these elements have a distance of G. Now, since we made sure that the whole array is divisible by five, ultimately we look at every element. And this is the next in line 13. So in line 13, we consider all of these five elements. And what we're doing now is we're sorting them, right? We're sorting these five elements. This is a constant loop. So we can do this in place. We can implement this once and we can optimize this for maximum speed. So whatever way we can do that. So we don't have to do heaps or something like that because we know it's always five elements. So we can even write it down in comparisons. Okay. So now we have sorted these five elements in place. And so then I showed you the picture, right? Where is it? So we have all these groups, right? All of these are groups of five. And the array itself is numbered from below to above. So the left lower corner is A of P. Then A of P plus one, A of P plus two, A of P plus three and so on. Until we hit again the first thing. And the first up there is A of P plus G. With this again in the first group, right? Then we have A of P plus G plus one, A of P plus G plus two and so on. Then we go through the second color, the second row from the bottom. And then we jump again to the first, which is then A, P plus two, G and so on. So I have no idea why the array is drawn the wrong way around. But you start from the bottom, go to the right. Then you jump one row up, go to the right. Then you jump one row up, go to the right. So this is how the array currently is organized. And now we want to sort the columns. So we want to sort the columns by their median. Because the median is always in the middle now. Because they are all sorted. And this is the next thing that is being done. So what we are doing now is we are selecting. We are calling select again on the medians. Because we have ordered it in such a way that all the medians lie between P plus two G and P plus three G minus one. Right? Because this element here is P has indexed P plus two G. This element here has P plus three G. And so the last element here is the one before that one, which is P plus two G minus three G minus one. So this is exactly what is there. So we are calling select again on P plus two G and P plus three G minus one. And what are we searching for? We're searching for the median. The median is just the group size halved rounded up. So we're basically looking for the median in all of these elements. Okay. So this is X. Now, the next thing is we use that as the pivot to partition around. So this element somehow lies somewhere. Oops, where we are. It lies somewhere in the middle. So it doesn't need to be here. But this is the element we select. So what do we know? Because the arrows tell you how all of these elements are ordered by now. Right? The first thing we did is we ordered the columns. So we made sure that these things are ordered. Now, we take this X as the pivot element. And if we take the X as the pivot element, we know that all the groups, if we order the medians, right, then we know that all the medians on the left are smaller than X and all the ones to the right are bigger than X. So this is how the arrows lie. Now, since all of these inequalities are known, we know that everything in the blue part is definitely not bigger than X, which are smaller than X. And everything in the yellow part will automatically be bigger than X. So as long as you can go from your element to the other element by following arrows, you only get bigger. And if you go against the arrows, you only get smaller. So you can see all of these elements in the blue are reachable from X by going against the arrows. So they have to be smaller. And all the elements in the yellow part are reachable from X by going with the arrows. So they only get bigger. So therefore, we know a lot about our array now. So we know that all the blue ones have to be left of X if we sort. So they can be disregarded in some sense. And all the yellow ones are right of X. And we don't know anything about the white ones. Because there we have to follow arrows in the correct direction and against the direction. So we don't know anything about the white ones. But we know a lot about the yellow and the blue ones. Okay. Now, the next thing what we do is we partition around the given X. So which is basically doing partition. But we don't choose randomly. But we tell partition what the pivot is. Right. So we know now that the pivot is X. And since we know that the pivot is X, we just take the pivot to partition. And then we just use the same thing as randomized select. So we just check whether after partitioning, I is equal to the point we're at. So if I is equal to K, then we know that Q, the partitioned element, is exactly the Ith order statistics. If this is not the case, then either in the first part, if I is smaller than K, then we know that we're in the lower part of the partitioned array. So we calculate the Ith order statistic in the low part. And if the other way, we know that we can disregard all the elements from X and down. So we only have to start at index Q plus one to consider the rest. We go to the end of the array, which is the last line. And we do no longer calculate the Ith order statistic, but we calculate the I minus Kth order statistic. Why? Because we already proved that K of the elements are definitely smaller than every element in the array Q plus one to R. So we only need to find the I minus K smallest element of the rest because the K smallest are already separated. So this is basically the idea. So this is how select works. And now we could ask ourselves, why is this indeed fast? And why is this theta of n? Yeah. Okay. So why is this theta of n? So what do we know about the algorithm? So this is the next theorem. So theorem 9.3. Oh, there is another theorem written. 9.3. Select has a runtime. Of theta of n. And in contrast, randomized select, where we only have an expected runtime of theta of n, select is not a randomized algorithm because it does no random call anywhere inside the loop. And so this is really the runtime. This is a worst case runtime. Okay. Now, what have we proved already? We have proved that the first loop, the first loop, the while, executes at most four times. theta of n. And in every single iteration of the while loop, it's theta of n at most. And it requires O of n time. Time. It becomes shorter and shorter, but it's definitely bounded above by n. And therefore, in O of n time, we have finished the while loop. Now, the next thing is we need to sort all of these five element groups. Sorting five elements takes theta of n time. So now sorting the five element groups takes theta of n time. And there are O of n, many groups. Right. So now we have to do a second part. It's a fifth of the array size at most. And so therefore, thus this sorting step, this group sorting takes O of n time as well, which means that the first part of select and the second part both take order of n time. big O of n time. Now, this is. Now we need the recursion right now, we need to calculate the recursive calls. So now. And actually, we have two recursions. The first recursion is the select recursion itself that takes. So let's let's let's let's let's display it once more. Let's display it once more. Here we are calling select recursively, right? So in line 16, we call select recursively and in line 23 or 24, we call select again recursively. So we need to figure out how much time these two. So we're doing two recursion calls in the same operation, right? So at most we can, of course, stop the recursions if we return any of these things, at least when they're length one. But we have two recursion calls, the one in 16 and the other one in either 23 or 24. OK, now we need to figure out what both of these recursion calls, how much time they take. So how much time does the first recursion call? So 16 line 16 recursion. But what did we do? We took the whole set and divided the size by five and then we called it on the groups, on the group medians only, right? So we call select again with an array that is only a fifth of the size. So the line 16 recursion takes smaller equal t n over five time. So this is the first one. Now we have to think about the others. So the line 23, 24 recursion. OK, now we have to think what is the worst thing that can happen. Now, what do we do? We decrease we call random partition then. So what happens if we if we this so what what we what we do is we remove it it it it it Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
