So, welcome back to the lecture course. We are currently discussing red-black trees, so binary search trees and yesterday, we were discussing how to search for stuff, how to get the successor and the predecessor of elements, how to insert and delete nodes of a binary search tree, and then we've switched our attention to red-black trees. And what we discussed yesterday is what the basic principles of red-black trees actually are. So I think this was the setting that you liked most. And oh, I have to clean the blackboard apparently first. Let's do that while I'm talking. So you remember about red-black trees. So we had the idea that a binary tree with the additional information, whether a given node is colored red or black, is actually a red-black tree if it satisfies five basic principles. The first is something I said already. So every node is either red or black. The second basic principle is that the root is black. Then the nil is black, which is considered the leaves of the tree. So the tree contains as children of the leaves, the nil nodes. The nil nodes are also considered black always. And then we know that whenever we have a node that is red, both of its children have to be black. So we don't have two red nodes as direct relatives. So this is the fourth principle. And the fifth principle is that whenever we start from a node and go downwards towards the leaves, then every path that goes from such a node to the leaves has the exactly same number of black nodes on its way. So no matter where we go, the number of black nodes that we pass always stays the same. Which means that we can assign to each node its black height, which is basically that. So the number of black nodes that we have to pass in order to get to a leaf, to an arbitrary leaf. So since all of these paths have the same number of black nodes that we pass. This number is unique. So this number is called the black height of a node. And we will use this number now to actually get the first estimate on how long several operations take on a red black tree. So, black board is clean. Okay, so, are there questions about the black height of the program? So, let's start. Let's start. Let's start. Let's start. Let's start. Let's start. Let's start. Let's start. Let's start. Let's get some chalk. Okay, so other questions about the black height of a knot? No. Okay, so what is the first thing that we describe is the first lemma about red-black trees, which is lemma 13.1. And it says if we have a red-black tree with n nodes, n internal nodes, so not counting the nil leaves. So if a red-black tree has n internal nodes, then its height can of course be bounded. And it can be bounded by some sort of logarithm. So it's at most two times the LG of n plus one. Is at most. Is at most. Is at most. And in order to prove that we use the black height. Oops. Proof. Proof. We use the black height of all of its nodes. So the first thing that we do is whenever we start at a node X, then it's what we want to do is we want to show that whenever we have a sub tree. So if X is an internal node. Node. Then its sub tree. Will contain at least. n. N. As a two to the black height of X minus one nodes. Okay. Okay. So how can we show that? We prove this by induction. On the black height. Of X. So if X has no black height. So if the height of X is zero. X has to be a leaf. And if it's a leaf. Then its sub tree has only one node. And so this is not. So the induction. So if black height of X is zero. This is trivial. Because then it's definitely a leaf. And if it's a leaf. Then. An nil leaf. For height zero. And then it doesn't have a single element. And so we don't have to prove everything. Now if X has a positive height. It is an internal node. So if. If a kite of X is bigger than one. It is an internal node. Right. So if it's an internal node. It has at least two children. And so. Both of the children. Then it has. It has two children. And the children. Usually have two possibilities. They can end. They can either be red. Or they can be black. Right. So. Let's think about. If the child is black. Okay. If. If. If the child. Is black. What happens. With its black height. Well. If the child is. Is black. Then. The black height. Will increase. By one. And. But not to itself. If not. Its own black height. Will not increase. Then. PH. Of X. Will increase. By one. But. Its own. Of X. Will increase. By one. But. Its own. Its own. Black height. Does not increase. If it's red. If the child is red. If the child is red. Neither. It's. Nor X. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Is. Of. Of. Of. Of. Of. Of. Of. Of. Of. Of. Right? That means that every child of x either has a black height of pH of x minus 1, so every child of x has a black height, every child c of x has pH of c is equal to pH of x minus 1 if it's black, or pH of x if red. Okay, so that's the first thing. So now the next thing is the height, so the normal height, not the black height. The height of c is always one less than the height of x. And actually I made a small mistake. We take induction on the height of x, not on the black height of x, sorry. If the height of x is zero, it's trivial. Okay, so this is the first thing. Now, what does this tell us? Well, it tells us that each child, so each child, c of x has at least 2 to the pH of x minus 1 minus 1. Note in its sub tree, by induction, because the black height is at least pH of x minus 1. So it might have more elements in the subtree, but it has at least 2 pH of x minus 1 minus 1 elements in the subtree. Okay, now the rest that we have to do is now we have to consider what happens if we take the x itself. But that means that x has at least 2 to the pH of x minus 1 minus 1 elements in the subtree from its left child plus 2 to the pH of x minus 1 minus 1 elements in the subtree on the right child. And it has itself is also there, which is actually equal to 2 to the pH of x minus 1 notes in its subtree. Okay, which proves the first claim. Okay, now that we know that, the rest that we have to do is we have to think about the height of the tree. And we do know everything about heights of the trees already. So let h be the height of the tree. Well, if we have the height of the tree, then when we look at property 4, whenever we go down from a node to a leaf, which takes h steps at most, then at least half of them have to be black because we cannot have two reds in succession. So every path from the root to the leaves has to contain at least half black nodes. But that means that the root of the black node, that the root node has to have a black height of at least half of h. So that means that the black height of the root has to be greater or equal h over 2. But that means that the number n has to be at least 2 to the h over 2 minus 1 because we know how the trees grow. And well, the rest is just moving that to the right and taking logarithms. So this is just enough for this one. Okay, but what does this tell us? This tells us that all the set operations that we've done so far, so as a consequence, from chapter 12, we can conclude that search, maximum, minimum, tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue tissue and predecessor have runtime estimates of theta of LGN. Well, because we showed that the runtime estimates are theta of the height of the tree and we've just proved that the height of the tree is logarithmic. Okay, great. So, or actually order, let's say O of LGN. Great. Now, what we do not yet know actually is how we construct such a red-black tree. We know all of its properties. We all that they are really nice because they have a worst case running time of everything that is logarithmic in the number of elements, but we do not yet know how to actually construct such a red-black tree. We do know how to construct the search tree itself, so we know if we have a tree how to insert a node and how to delete a node. This is something we know and we do know that all of these operations also have a runtime on order of the height of the tree. So, if we take a red-black tree and we use the ordinary insert to delete operations, then we do know that they would work also in order of LGN steps. Right? However, if we think about it, apparently we do not know how to color the nodes yet. So, even if we insert something, we don't know how to color them. And we don't know whether after inserting the red-black tree property actually is still satisfied. And since we have already seen that if the data arrives in a bad sequence for a normal binary search tree, then we can get a tree whose height is actually equal to the number of elements. And so, apparently standard insert does not behave properly and it does not, cannot keep the red-black tree properties. So, we need to find a method of how to make sure that after inserting elements into our tree, the red-black property will be satisfied after the insert and delete operations. Right? And so, what we can in principle do is we can insert a node, then we have to come up with a color. And after we've come up with a color, we somehow have to repair the red-black tree so that after the repair step, the red-black tree property is again satisfied so that we can get all of our operations in our LGN time. And what is also important, we have to do this in order of LGN steps because it doesn't help a lot if our insert operation takes order of end time, for example. Right? So, our repair step has to be fast. And in order to improve, also to introduce repair steps, the first thing we have to look at are so-called tree rotations. And I will project onto the blackboard how such a tree rotation looks like. If I can get this one down, I can. Then I can get this one down. And then we can turn on. So, let me do all the chuckling. This one off. This one change. This one on. Which doesn't go on, of course not. Now it goes on. Okay. So, this is a rotation. So, as you can see, a rotation always acts on two nodes. And it's basically exchanging the two nodes in the trees and it's swapping the children. So, if we have, if we look at, and that's why it's called a rotation, right? Because this, the sequence of children stays the same. So, alpha is left of beta and beta is left of gamma. So, beta stays in the middle. And what is a rotation doing? It's exchanging the nodes X and Y. And since it's exchanging X and Y, X can have two children first. And Y can only have one child in addition to X. So, what we do is we get X from being the left child of Y to being the parent of Y and Y being the right child of X. So, why does it have to be like this? Because we have to keep the search tree property. And the search tree property says that X is smaller or equal Y. Since X is smaller or equal Y, Y has to be the right child of X afterward. So, we basically, and this is why it's called a rotation. So, if you look at this, this looks like having these five nodes. Alpha, beta, gamma, Y, and X. We rotate it once clockwise. So, this is the right rotate. The right rotate is rotating it once clockwise. So, the X moves up, the Y moves down, gamma moves down with the Y. The beta stays where it is and the alpha moves up with the X. Right? So, we do not touch the left child of X and we do not touch the right child of Y. But what we do is we exchange X and Y and we move beta from being the right child of X to being the left child of Y afterwards. So, the only one which stays changes whose child it is. And we have two rotations and they are inverse to each other. The right rotation does what I just explained and the left rotation undoes the rotation again. So, this is how the two, three rotations work. And this is basically the implementation of the left rotation. Right? So, that's what we do. We first assign Y as the new right node of X. And we assign to the right node of X the left node of Y, which is the beta. And then we have to update the parents. But we only have to check whether we have to update the parents properly because of the nils or not nils. So, if the beta was nil, we don't have to do anything. Otherwise, we have to remember that the new parent is now X. And the parents of Y and X exchange. And if one of them was the root, we have to remember that this is the new root now. And so, this is the left rotation, which is from the right side to the left side. And so, if for example, X was the root before, then Y would be the new root. So, this is this if here. If X parent was nil, so X was the root, then the new root will be Y. And otherwise, if X was a left child, then Y becomes a left child. If X was a right child, now Y is. And that's it. So, this is the procedure that changes the left rotate. And for the exercises, you would have to implement the right rotate just to make yourself a bit familiar with how these rotate operations work. So, this is only rewiring. It's rewiring of pointers and nothing else. And just making sure that the fringe cases, so that one of the children is nil or that one of the rotated nodes is root. So, these are the fringe cases you have to consider in the implementation. But right rotate will be the first exercise of the new sheet. It's good to learn this. So, let's look at the left and right rotation in a larger tree. So, here we have the two nodes 11 and 18. And we want to rotate them. We want to do a left rotation, which as we say, exchanges X for Y. So, it moves the 18, the Y up on the place of X. The 9 stays where it is, attached to the X. And the 19 stays also where it is, attached to the Y. And then the subtree of Y, which is the 14, 12, 17, moves from the Y to the X. I think if you look at it in pictures, it's quite easy to grasp what such a rotation operation is doing. Right? And as you can see, the rotation operation changes the balance of the tree, somehow. Because it shortens the path that goes from 7 to 20 by 1. But it increases the length of the paths that goes from 7 to 9, from 7 to 12, and from 7 to 17. So, by that you can shorten some of the paths, the ones that are to the right of the node that is being promoted up. And you increase the length of the path for all the nodes that are being promoted down. So, if you're doing a left rotate, like here, you increase all the paths that go to the left from X by 1. And you decrease all the paths that go to the right from Y by 1. You do not change the length of the paths for the betas, for the ones that change from Y to X. Because either they hop through Y or they hop through X, but they have the same number of hops afterwards. Okay? So, this is what a rotation operation is doing. And so, you can imagine that by performing enough of these operation rotations, you can rebalance the tree. You can even change the route, right? So, if we would rotate the 7 and the 11, then the 11 would be the next route. And the 7 would become one of the children. So, even if the tree is very imbalanced, you could in principle balance it by just switching where the route is. And this is the operation that we need to do once we insert nodes. So, we have to make sure that this balancing is there. And the balancing is done by the colors. So, the colors tell us how balanced or imbalanced the tree is. Because the black height of a node tells us that the number of black elements on every path, they somehow make sure that the tree is never very imbalanced. The worst thing, what can happen is that one of the paths is double the size of the other, but it cannot be worse than that. And so, everything stays logarithmic in height. What we've just proved. Okay. So, this is the rotation operation. And now, we are getting complicated. Which is the insert operation into the tree. Which is the simpler one. The delete operation is the verse one. So, the insert operation is the simpler one. The insert operation needs to do the following. The idea is the following. What we are actually doing is we're doing the same insert operation as before, more or less. So, we're taking our tree. We're traversing our tree. We look for the leaf where we can insert the new element. Why do we do that? Because the insert operation into our standard tree is exactly done so that we keep the binary search tree property. And if we think about it, I've explained it before, but the rotation operation keeps the binary search tree property. That's exactly why we have to exchange these things in this way. So, every rotation operation transfers a binary search tree into a binary search tree. And so, what we can do first, we just insert the node where it has been before. Which is, this is almost everything from here until there. So, this says that just inserted as before. The only change to the insert operation before is that we do, that we compare with the T.Nil. So, we compare not with nil, but we compare with the Sentinel nil that we've inserted for the red-black tree. Everything else is exactly the same. So, we do just an ordinary insert operation. And until line 16. And in line 16, we decide which color the new node gets. And the new node will be red. So, red, we like. We have no idea where we go. So, the new operation, the new color will be red. So, why will it be red? Because before the insert operation, the tree had the property that all of the nodes, all of the paths, had the same number of black nodes. So, if we insert the node and make it red, we don't change that property. So, still after inserting, the tree has this property 5 that tells that if we start at any node and we go down to any leaf, the number of black nodes on the path will be the same. However, we did change something. And we did not keep all the properties. Which properties can be violated after this insert operation? Well, actually, it can be two. The first one that can be violated is we said that the root always has to be black. But if the tree was empty, we've just inserted one node and the new node is red. So, it could be that the new node is the root and the new node is red. So, we might have been that we violated that property. Well, this one is easy to repair because we just recolor it black and we're finished. And because the node then is only the same, the only one. But the second one, which is even worse, is what can happen is now that we could have two red nodes in succession. Because if the last leaf where we inserted our new node was red, then we inserted a node below which is again red. And this can't happen in a red-black tree because we know that both of the children of a red node have to be black. But we cannot just color it black because then we would violate the other thing which is the number of black things on the leaf, on the path. So, this is where we have to fix and this is what the next procedure is doing. It's just fixing the tree. Okay, so the next thing what we're doing is we call red-black insert fix up. And so, we have to think what red-black insert fix up is actually doing. And now, let's have a look at the diagrams first. So, where are they? They are here. Okay, so what can happen? What can happen is that our new node is red and its parent is also red, which is the bad violation that is over there, right? So, we have just inserted the four below the five. The five was red and we've inserted a new red node and now we have two red nodes in succession. So, actually, the children of five are not both black. They were before because both of them were nil, which is black as we know, but now they're no longer black. So, we have to do something with the four. We cannot color it black. That's something we've already discussed because otherwise the black node property is no longer true. So, what we have to do is we have to actually recolor the parent black. That's the only way to solve the problem. So, we have to get the five. The five black. Okay, in order to get the five black, we still cannot change the number of blacks on the path to four. But if that means if we recolor the five black, we need to recolor its parent red. And then the parent has the same problem, which has a parent that is red, but it also has, since it's red, it has to have two children that are both black. And so, we cannot keep the red white. We need to recolor the white black as well. But now we have still two red nodes in succession. Okay, so how to fix that? And the problem is here, we cannot simply recolor it because the parent is black. And so, there the first rotation happens, which is we have to rotate the red up. We have to rotate the seven up. And we will go through all of the cases in succession. But this is how it works to repair this tree. So, the next is case two, where we rotate the seven up and two down. But still, we have the problem that now we have two nodes in succession, which makes the next rotation necessary, which rotates the seven to the root and the 11 down. And then we get the seven black and get the red red at the 11 red. And then we're back in a red black tree with the proper coloring. So, this is how it works on this tree. And so, we've seen that there are several cases, case one, case two, case three. That's how it works, how it's not rotated. Okay, so, in order to understand why this works, we have to introduce one more tree term. So, we now know children and we now know parents. And now we have a choice how we call the relative, the siblings, the sibling of the parent. And as usual, we have to choose between uncle and aunt. And usually, people talk about trees, call it uncle. Nowadays, with a footnote that this is a mathematical term. So, we can invent a new one. So, a gender neutral one. But there isn't for uncles around. Not yet. Will change in the future. But it's not yet there. So, we call them uncles. And so, and actually, many of these, sorry, I'm rotating the wrong direction. So, if we look at these two things here. So, the uncle of four is eight. Because the parent of four is five. And so, the uncle is red. So, this is case one. We have two reds in succession. And the uncle is red as well. The other one is here. So, here we have two reds in succession. But the uncle of two is black. Which is the 14. So, these two cases need to be distinguished. And they have different operations. So, by resolving the two reds problem. We have to distinguish whether the uncle of the node is black. Or whether the uncle of the node is red. If the uncle of the node is red, it's easy. We just change colors. If the uncle of the node is black, we have to do something else. We have to rotate the graph. Okay. So, let's go through the fix up. Okay. Which is the complicated operation for the insert. Okay. So, let's see what we're doing. So, the first thing is we check whether we anyway have to do anything. Right? So, we are at node set. And we are looking at the whole tree. And we have to check whether we have to do anything. We only call red, black, insert fix up if the color of us is red. So, if we are red, then we call fix up. If we are black, we don't have to do anything. So, if we are red, we call it fix up. And fix up is only doing something if our parent is also red. Otherwise, we're finished. Okay. So, this is the first check. So, while we are red. So, while our parent is red, we're doing following. We're first checking whether our parent is a left child or a right child. The distinction between these two things is only a symmetry problem. Whether we do something in the right subtree or something in the left subtree. And the only thing that changes is whether we have to left rotate or whether we have to right rotate everything. Okay? So, we only have to discuss the left half. The right half is just symmetric by mirroring everything. So, in the right half. So, that's why we change. So, if our parent, our grandparent, if our grandparent is a left child, then everything is what we're looking at. And we take the uncle of Z, which is the right child of our grandparent. Right? Our parent is the left child. The uncle is the right child. So, why is the uncle? And now we have to distinguish the two cases whether the uncle is red or the uncle is black. If the uncle is red, I said we only have to change colors. So, we only change our color. We keep our color. We only change our parents' color to black. We change our uncle's colors to black. But we change our grandparents' color to red. Which makes sure that the number of blacks on our path stays the same. Because we only switch exactly the colors. And then we are moving to our grandparent. Because we've changed our grandparent to red. And this is the next one we have to check. So, we are moving the current pointer to our grandparent and that was it. So, this was the simple case. The more complicated case is when we are a right child or a left child. So, if we are a right child, then we have to left rotate once. And then we change colors again. So, we change our parents' color again to black. Our grandparents' color again to red. And then we call right rotate on our grandparent. So, this is the third case. So, the second case does two rotations. The third case does only one rotation. Only the right rotation. And this we will prove in steps that this keeps the red. This reinstalls the red black properties of the subtree. And then we are going upwards and upwards and upwards. So, now let's think how fast this is. How much effort this is. And we will prove that it actually resolves all of the four properties in a second. So, we go through this one by one. Only for the left tree. So, we do know that all the rotations that we are doing are keeping the binary search tree property. Which is important. Okay? That's something we discussed. Right? All the rotations make sure that the binary search tree property stays as it is. So, we don't change the fact that our red black tree is a binary search tree. Because we only do rotations and color changes. We don't change any other thing in the tree. We only change the tree by doing rotations and by doing color changes. Color changes don't change the search tree property. All of the color changings that we are doing don't change the black height of the nodes. Because we just sweet. It's these ones that we took. We just changed blacks and reds. Or they increase. And when do they increase the color? By one. If we have to go through the root. If we change through the root, then all of the nodes get one higher black height. Why? Because we only go through the root if we rotate a red node to the root. And if you rotate the red node to the root, the red node will be afterwards black. And this increases the black height for all the nodes by one. These are the only things where we change the black height. Otherwise, we always recolor our parents to black, but our grandparents to red, which doesn't change the black height. Because we exchange a black and a red, basically. Okay, so this is the two things that stay as they are. And that the two properties two and four are actually, which is root is black and no two reds in succession. That they are restored is something we will discuss in detail. Okay. But those are the three cases. The first case is our uncle is red. If the uncle is red, we only change colors. If the uncle is black and we are a right child, we have to do two rotations, a left rotation and a right rotation. And if our uncle is black and we are a left child, we only have to do one right rotation at our grandparent. So we only always have to do a right rotation at our grandparent. But if we are a right child, we also have to do a left rotation at us. Okay, so this is what we are doing. And as you can see, just the other way around on when we are, when our parent is a right child. When our parent is a right child, we still do the uncle, which is now the left child of our parent, of our grandparent. If it's red, we only change colors. Otherwise, we check whether we are a left child. If we are a left child, we have to do a right rotate where we are. And then we have to do a left rotate at our grandparent. So those are the only operations. And now we have to and now we go back to the picture once again. And look again at the picture and see what we're doing. Okay, now let's look at the picture again. We just inserted the four. We've inserted the four. We're checking whether our parent is red, which is true. So the fix-up operation does the first thing. It checks whether the uncle, which is the red eight, where the Y is, whether this one is red. It is red. So this is case one, where we only have to recolor. So we recolor our uncle and our parent to black and we recolor our grandparent to red. And we move up our current pointer to our grandparent and continue from there. Everything below stays as it is. Okay, then we go to our grandparent. Our grandparent is not a current node. We check whether our grandparent's parent is red, which it is. And so we have to check the uncle. The uncle is the 14, which is black. And we are a right child. Right? The seven is a right child of two, which means we have to do two rotations. Okay. So the first rotation that we're doing is we're rotating the seven, five, four, and then we're rotating with our grandparent. That's two rotations. So that gives us this new case here. The next thing we have to do is we have to move to our old grandparent. Our old grandparent was the two. So, right? Which means that we move our attention to the two now. The two has its own parent being a seven. The seven is again red. So we have to do a next rotation. Now we have to check again what is the uncle of seven, the uncle of two. The uncle of two is the 14. Okay. Now, since we're at the 14, we have to check the next rotation. The next rotation is rotating here with this element. So, therefore, we only have to do one rotation. So we rotate the seven and the 11. The seven moves up. The 11 moves down. And we move the child of seven, which is the eight, to be the new child of 11, which is the eight here. We don't change the colors of the eight, but we do change the colors of the seven and the 11. So we exchange the color seven to the color of the 11, which is now the color seven will be black now and the 11 will be red now. Okay. So this is the second, the third case where we only have one rotation to do. Okay. So these are the three cases. Now let's prove that in our three cases, actually the insert fix up does what it should do. Okay. So. Of course, what we do is we produce, this is a loop, right? So the fix up operation is a loop. And so what we have to do, of course, is to prove that is has an loop invariant and that the loop invariant after termination will make sure that we have finished. Okay. Okay. So, um, we prove correctness by a loop invariant. So we have to do the while loop. And there is only one large while loop. So this is the while loop in the operation fix up. Okay. So what is the loop invariant? The first one is, say this rate. Right. This is where we start. We said we never call fix up if said is not rate. If said that piece the root then said that piece black. So if said that P is root. Said that P is black. So this is the second thing property. And the third one is if any red black property is violated, it is either property two that the root is red or it's property four that we don't have that we have to adjacent reds. So if any RB property is violated. It is either two, root is black, or four, note every red has black children, and never both. And never both. So if any of the red-black properties are violated, it's one of them and never all the others. So this is the important thing. This is the loop invariant. And so we will discuss whether this loop invariant stays during all the phases as they are. So let's talk about the initialization phase. That's something we've already discussed. The initialization phase is called after red-black insert. So red-black fix-up is always called after red-black insert. And so what are the five properties of the red-black tree? We've already discussed that. Well, of course, we insert the node and we give it a color. So property one is obviously satisfied. We don't have to think about that. Every color is black or red. So this is simple. The second one is the third property that tells us that... What was the third property? So the... Wait. The first one was every node is colored. The second one was the root is black. The nils are black. Well, we didn't change any nils. So the nils still are black, which is trivial. And the fifth one is that the path property. But we added a red node, which doesn't change the black height of anything. So the first three, so one, three and five are obvious. Are obviously satisfied. So properties are obviously satisfied. Okay. So if the tree was empty, we inserted the node, which is red at the root. So then we violate property two. So this is the only node. So this is the only possible violation. So if the tree was empty, was empty, only two is violated. Otherwise, the root stays black. Because insert happens at the leaf and not at the root. And so only four can be violated. Okay. After initialization phase, set is red because we just colored it red. So the first property is obvious. And if the parent of set is root, then the parent is black. That's just something we said. Okay. So the initialization phase obviously keeps all the loop invariants as well. And they are. Okay, now we have to think about maintenance. And maintenance, we have three cases on the left, and three cases on the right. So altogether, we have three, we have six cases that can happen, right? So, our maintenance. There are six cases. But we only need to prove three by symmetry. By symmetry, left, right, we only need to prove three. Okay, so that means we assume that the parent, our parent is a left child of our grandparent. So, we assume that ZP is a left child of our grandparent, of our ZPP. Okay, now, let's look at case one. Case one was that their uncle, case one, uncle is red. So, our uncle is red. So, our uncle is red. And our parent is red. Since our parent is red, our grandparent cannot be red. Our grandparent has to be black, because we cannot have two reds in succession in the old tree, because the old tree was a red-black tree. So, our grandparent has to be black. We know that ZPP is black. Yeah. So, what do we know now? We know that we are red, our parent is red, our grandparent is black, and our uncle is red. Right? That means that the only place where property four is violated is between us and our parent. So, property four is only violated for CP and ZPP. That's the only place where it's violated. Okay, now, if the uncle is red, then we have the following situation. we have the situation that our grandparent is black. This is black. Red is nothing. So, here, why do I draw it? I have any space. I could just project it. This is stupid. Okay. Okay, here we are. So, this is the situation. I don't have to draw it to the blackboard. But I have to switch it for the camera. Camera. Okay, now, cameras. Okay, now it's back on again. Okay, great. Okay, so, situation is we are a child. We have two possibilities, right? So, we can be the right child of our parent or we can be the left child of our parent, which are these two cases there. We know that we are red, our parent is red, our grandparent is black, and our uncle is red. So, those are the three possibilities. Now, in both solutions that we take, is we recolor everything. So, recolor our grandparent, we recolor our parent and our uncle black, and recolor our grandparent red, and we stay red. Right? So, this is the recoloring operation that case one is doing. So, now, let's look at this small sub-tree. After this recoloring operation, we definitely have solved the red-black property in this sub-tree. because, there are no two nodes adjacent to each other that are red. And, in addition, we haven't changed the black height of anything. Because the black height of every node, so we have five paths to go. We have the path alpha, the path beta, the path gamma, the path delta, and the path epsilon on the blackboard. If we pass through our two nodes, the black height edit would be from our grandparent only for all of the nodes, alpha, beta, gamma, delta, epsilon. The grandparent is the only black node on any of these paths, and there is a single one which increases the black height by one. After recoloring, we have two different black nodes that can be on the path. On the path through delta and epsilon, and on the path through alpha, beta, and gamma, So, our parent or our uncle. But our grandparent has become red, so it does not add one to the black height, but our parent adds one to a black height for the paths alpha, beta, and gamma, and our grandparent and our uncle adds one to the black height for delta and epsilon. So the black height stays the same for all the nodes below, and above we haven't changed any color, so the black height stays the same, which means the property five keeps true. So case one, property five, property five stays true, which is the only interesting one, because we haven't changed the route currently, not yet at least. The only thing that could happen is that, see that our grandparent was the route. Right? So what can happen is that we can have a violation of two now. So possible violation, new violation, new violation, is property two, and this is only the case if our great parent, our grandparent, was root. Yes? property four was salvaged in this subtree. Yes? Property four is now true in this subtree, but property four was reinstated, was corrected, is now true. is now true in the subtree. Okay? Okay? Okay, so we can see that property four is now true in this subtree. Property four was reinstated, was corrected, is now true in the subtree. Okay? Okay? So, that means that our loop invariant stays correct. We have now changed our attention to our great-grandparent. We've just recolored red. So, after the loop, set is now at our great-grandparent, which is red. the first property of the loop invariant stays as it is. The second one is still true. If the parent of our great-grandparent was root, we didn't change the color. So, it's still black. And, if any red property is violated, it's either two or four. It's not four anymore. It can be two though, but it cannot be both. we have kept the loop invariant as it was. Right? And, the root was red, now we would recolored black, and by that change the height of every node, the black height of every node by one. So, this is the only operation where the black height can change. Okay, so this solves case one. Everybody satisfied? Okay, great. Which means that we need to move to case two. Okay, let's get rid of the picture again. let's turn on the light again. And, let's move to case two. Okay, so case two. Why is the camera always? Now it's gone. I have no idea where the cam, oh, it's now it's back on. I hope that this doesn't show in the, in the, in the, we'll see. Now it's off again, now it's on again. So, I hope that the, the, the recording doesn't show the same behavior, because the camera is gone, and it's back, and it's gone, and it's back. So, at least in the picture here, the camera drops, and comes back, and drops, and comes back. Hmm, we'll see. I have no idea. Now it's gone, you see? I hope it's not broken. Well, otherwise you have to come to the lecture course. I don't know how to, well, I can try to change it, change it back. It works again. I have no idea. Well, we'll see. great. Now, now we have two possibilities. The next two cases are case two and case three. Okay. So, in case two and case three, we know that the uncle, um, is black. So, said is red. The uncle is black. And case two says, that, um, we are a right child. And, um, case three says, we're a left child. So, two said is a right child. And three says, said is a left child. So, why do we have to, this thing? So, it's the idea. Why do we have to distinguish these two cases? That's, we have to think about, we, we want to rotate now. And we know that left child is a left child. So, two said is a right child. And three, said is a left child. Yes, we have to think about, we want to rotate now. And we know that left and right children behave differently in rotations. Right? Because, if you're doing a right rotate, for example, and we're a left child, we stay at the node where we are. But if we're a right child, we switch from one of the nodes to the other. Right? the middle, the middle node switches as a child child of the left to a child of the right node. But the boundary children don't change. They just go with their nodes. But the middle child changes to be a child from the one to a child from the other. And this makes a difference in coloring, right? that's why we have to distinguish these two cases. Now, let's look at a picture again of the cases two and three. So, those are the two cases that we have to fix. Two and three. So, first is case two. Case two is, we are a right child. And so, the idea is, we first transfer case two to case three. Which means, afterwards, being a left child. And in order to do that, we perform one rotation. rotation. Because this is exactly the idea. Right? So, a rotation makes true that we become, from being a right child, we afterwards have the situation where we have a left child that has the same color. Right? So, we rotate the A and B. And afterwards, the old B, which was the Z, will be the new parent. And the parent, that was the A, will be the new child. But we don't change colors. And so, we keep property five as it is. Because the only thing what we do, is we change nothing but color. We change only the sequence of two reds. And the sequence of two reds, doesn't change the number of blacks on any path. Is this clear? Right? So, if we change two reds, the number of blacks on any path doesn't change. Okay. So, we keep property five. So, doing the first rotation, so going from case two to case three, case two to case three, does not change any of the loop invariants. Because, they say it moves, but it stays within the red nodes. We don't change any root stuff. So, it stays black. And, the only violation that we have, is still four. We had a violation of four before. Now, we have a violation of four still. Because, we only have changed the sequence of the red nodes. And, we have not changed the number of red blacks. So, case two to case three, keeps the loop invariant. Keeps the loop invariant. Okay. Now, now, let's talk about case three. Okay. Now, now let's talk about case three. And, case two, makes a case three out of the case two. So, what is case three? Case three has, we have a violation of the fourth property. And, we do know, again as before, we are red, our parent is red, our grandparent is black, and our uncle is black. So, we don't want to touch our uncle. We only want to rotate back our parent with our grandparent. So, what we are doing is we are rotating our parent and our grandparent, which moves our grandparent down to be a sibling of us, which is a nice transformation. Grandparents would love that. And, a youth fountain. And then, our, our parent will stay our parent because of the rotation, because we are a left child of our parent. And, left children don't change when we are doing a right rotation. So, we stay our left child. the, the parent of our parent, the grandparent becomes the parent's right child. And, what we are doing is we are changing the colors of our parent and of our grandparent. So, the parent will be black, then the grandparent will be red. So, now, let's, this solves apparently the fourth problem. problem. It does not introduce a problem too, because we've just colored the top most color black, which keeps the root property. And, the only thing that might change is property five. So, we have to count again the black height of all the nodes that we're passing through. Right? So, let's go, through a alpha. Through alpha, the only change is by node C. Node C counts as one black, and then everything else is red going through alpha. Going through beta and through gamma as well. Going through delta or, or going to delta, we have to exchange, we have to increase one because we're going through C. So, the black height of all of the nodes alpha, beta, gamma, delta is one higher than when they came in. Now, the same is true for the last tree, because here all the paths have to go to B, which are black, which is black, and C and R are still red, so they don't count for the black height. So, property five stays as it was. Right? So, we've proved that case two to case three keeps the loop invariant. Case three also keeps the loop invariant. Invariant. And, solves the violated four. Okay, All the others are just the mirror images of those, by going the other way. Okay, great. So, that means that the maintenance step keeps the loop invariant. So, that means we are now at termination. Right? so when do we terminate? We terminate when we've reached root. Okay, why is the light not going on? So, the last thing we have to talk about is termination. Okay, what happens if we terminate our loop? Well, we terminate our loop, um, when,! The uppermost thing is, when either, when either, um, our note is, our note is, our parent note is black. Then we terminate, and we don't have to do anything anymore. But if our parent note is black, then we've solved all of our problems, because, we have a parent note, which means, that, worst case, this is root. And so, property two can no longer be, um, violated. if we have a parent note, we stop, and the parent note is black, root has to be black. Okay, and we've always solved the, the problem four. So, first termination, if parent, is black, uh, two, is also, um, true. So, property true, is also satisfied. And that means, that, that means, that, that means, that, that means, we're finished. So, red, black tree. So, this is the, this is the possibility. Um, now, um, um, um, the only thing, that could happen, is that, Z is the root. Right? So, if Z is the root, and it is red, then, Z dot P, is the sentinel, which is nil. and we have to recolor, and we have to recolor, said black. And then we recolor, the root black. And if we recolor, the root black, we've again satisfied property two. Right? So if, if, if, if no parent, um, we recolor. So, its parent is the sentinel, is the sentinel, is the sentinel, t dot nil, we recolor, said black, and property two is again satisfied. And, property two is again satisfied. And property two was the only one, which could be violated, after any of the iteration steps, because we always clean out property four. And so, at the end, all of the five properties are satisfied, and after, after fix up insert, we have a red black tree again. now, let's think about how much work is red black insert. Because that's the next question. Right? So how much operations do it take? Does it take? Well, there is one thing that is definitely true. Um, every while iteration, moves our point up by at least one. um, in the tree. Right? So we always go to either our parent or to our grandparent. Which means that we always go up in the tree. And so, it's order of height, time. Because every fix up, is either doing no rotation, but only recoloring. Or it's doing one rotation, and a bit of recoloring. Or it's doing two rotations, and a bit of recoloring. But any, anyway, this is always theta of one. This is bounded. That doesn't depend on the size of the tree. So, um, in the analysis, we take one step up, which means that the runtime is at most the height of the tree. And we've already proved that the height of the tree is logarithmic. which means that the runtime is, is order of LG of n. Of fix up. So we have the insert operation is order of LG of n. The fix up operation is order of LG of n. So we do have a red black insert that is order on log of n. Okay. Now. We have solved the easy one. We've already seen that, that removing stuff from a tree is already a complicated thing. Um, even if we don't care about red black properties. So what we now have to do is now we have to figure out how to remove stuff from a red black tree and keep all the properties. Um, wait, it's, it's over now, So we do that next time. So have a nice afternoon. Good afternoon. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
