Anyway, so last time, okay, finally, sorry. So we are currently working on sorting and producing algorithms for sorting. And we've already seen last time that there are several classes of sorting algorithms, and depending on which class your sorting algorithm belongs, it has different lower bounds on runtime or on the number of comparisons to make. And so what did we do by now? We introduced several sorting algorithms that are comparison sorts, so that only depend on comparing elements with each other. The most promising ones were merge sort and heap sort. We've shown that both of them have a runtime of upper bound of n log n. We also introduced quick sort or randomized quick sort with an expected runtime of n log n, which is basically the fastest unless we, by chance, hit the worst case behavior, which is theta of n squared. And last time we started to do sorting algorithms that take external information, so not only comparison with elements among each other. And one of the important ones was, well, actually the first one that we did was counting sort. Just to remind you what counting sort was, it knew in advance that all the keys were integers, basically small integers that distinguished the elements. And what we did is basically we pre-allocated an array or several arrays, but one, the counting array was very important. So we pre-allocated a counting array, and then we counted the frequency for each key. And knowing the frequency for each key, we could use a second array. So it's not an in-place sort, but we could use a second array. And going from the first array, from the back to the front, we knew from the counting into which position each of the elements in the original array A had to go in the new array B. And by that way, we sorted all the elements by the keys. And we proved basically that this is a theta of n algorithm. So knowing not only the comparison possibilities among each element, but also knowing comparison possibility with an external source, like a sequence of all the numbers that can happen as keys, then we can do sorting faster than the lower bound of n log n for comparison sorts. And the counting sort had a second very important property, which was it is a stable sorting algorithm. So if you have the same key twice in the sorted array, the elements will end up in the same sequence as they had been before in the original array. So we will never exchange two elements with the same key. So we intrinsically assume that those are sorted in the original array. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Counting sort has an important disadvantage. It is only theta of n if the number, the possible keys that we're looking at are also order of n. Right? n is the size of the array. And what we can do is we can have a small multiple of n for the keys. But we cannot have, if we have a large array, we cannot have huge keys. So we cannot have keys in the, like social security numbers, right? So if you're from any country, probably have a social security number. In Austria, social security numbers are 10 digits. In the US, they're even longer. And I don't know how they are organized. But usually you have to have at least as many social security numbers as you have people living in the country, because they should be unique usually. And now if you have a subset of Austrians, let's say of thousands, and you want to sort them by social security numbers, then it's probably not a great idea to use counting sort, right? Because you would have to pre-allocate an array that can hold all the possible social security numbers, which is just to leak, just to leak. And then suddenly the advantage of having such an array, of having a counting sort disappears very fast. If the set of your keys is much larger than the array that you want to sort. And so in order to mitigate that problem, we get a new algorithm, which is the next one that we're talking about. And this is a radix sort. And radix sort is also a linear sorting. So it's a theta of n sorting algorithm. The constants with respect to counting sort are different. So what we talked about that counting sort is order of k plus n, where k is the number of keys that are possible, and n is the number of elements in the array. And so we want to have something that helps us to control k. And the idea is radix sort. And we've been talking about this before. We're talking about the stickers, right? So if you have such a sticker collection album, and you want to sort your stickers for exchanging them with other people, or something like that, usually sort them by numbers to get an overview of what you're doing. And if you get new packs or several of those and you want to sort them, usually you don't compare them with each other. At least I've never seen anybody do that. So usually people sort them first by, depending on table size, but let's say we have a small table. So they usually sort them by whether they are hundreds or not hundreds, which makes you go through the area once. And then you take away the hundreds, and you start with the not hundreds, and then you sort them by tens, right? So you have the ones that are below 10, the ones below 20, and so on, until you're going to the ones that are below 99. And then you take the small packs, which are not so big, and then you sort them. And then you put all the things on top of each other. And that's basically the idea of radix sort. So radix sort just does the same thing. However, there is a better way to do it, and nobody does it because nobody thinks about that. So the variant of sorting these things, actually, so what we do intuitively as humans, somehow works somewhat, but not perfectly. And the reason is we cannot do the staples together, so we keep them in piles, and then we sort them, and afterwards we put them together. But this is not something that computers like to do. So they like to keep the array more or less as intact as possible. And what is interesting, what works better, once we have things like counting sort, is we first, we do not start sorting them by the hundreds position, but we start sorting them by the one-digit positions. So we first sort all of them together that contain ones at the last place, then twos at the last place, and so on, until nines at the last place. Okay? And then we put them back on top of each other. And after we've done that, they are still not sorted. But what we do is that all the ones, all the stickers with the ones at the end come before all the stickers with the nine at the end. Okay? And then we take the second digit, the tens digit, and we sort the whole array again by the tens digit. And since we have a stable counting sort, we make sure that once we sort everything by the tens digit, even if they have the same tens position, the ones with the ones come before the ones with the nines. Right? That's because our counting sort never exchanges elements in the first part of the array with elements in the second part of the array. And so after doing two rounds through the arrays, first sorting by the ones digit and sorting by the tens digit, what we have is that everything that is zero one comes before everything that is zero two, and so on, which comes before everything that is 17, which comes before everything that is 29, and so on. And then we go again through the array sorting by the hundreds position. And then we stop only after we've gone through the whole positions. And the only thing we need is buckets for our counts for every position, which is usually, if you sort by digits, we only need 10 of them. So the key size is always 10. But what we do is we go through the whole array several times, depending on the comparison between the key size and the large keys. And so if we sound by social security numbers, which are 10 digits in Austria, we have to go through the array 10 times. But we know that we have to go through the array a fixed number of times, making the thing still linear, because every counting sort within that is linear in the size of the array, plus the key size, which is small, because the key size is only 10. Right? Okay, so this is radix sort. I will just put it a very short time on the blackboard, which is up there. So you can see radix sort. So radix sort is, we just go through all the digits of our keys, and then we use some stable sort algorithm to sort the array on the i-th digit. And one possibility for the stable sort algorithm is, for example, counting sort that we learned before. And since we know that counting sort does everything in order of n plus k time, this is only multiplied by the number of digits that we have, which is lemma 83. I don't write it to the blackboard because this is more or less obvious. But what you want to see is how, how, an example, how radix sort works. So let's see, we have a, we have keys below thousand, and then what we do first, can you see that actually? Let me see it, but I can't, I don't know how to, wait, let me see whether this works. No. Well, more or less. So if you have, oh, saved. So if you have numbers like that are below thousand, and you want to have bucket sizes of 10, what you first do is to take the last digit and sort by the last digit, right? And then what you get is that the second column where the last digits are in ascending order. And then we use a stable sort to sort by the second digit and the second digit here, the three and the five appear, and also the two appear several times. But what we make sure is that the first digits, the lowest digits stay in order, making sure that if we look at the second column and then know that it's only the yellow part is highlighted. But you shouldn't only look at the yellow part, but you should look at both columns, at the last two columns. And what you can see is that the last two columns now are sorted ascendingly, and only the first column is wrong. And then we take the first column, so the hundredth position, and sort by that. And afterwards, we know that all the three columns are sorted in an ascending order. So this is the idea. So usually nobody does this using a sticker album, but this is a possibility to do it in a computer. And actually, if you want to do that in the computer way, what you usually have is keys are bit numbers of bits, right? And so what you're usually doing if you have keys that have B bits inside, right? B bit numbers, like 64-bit numbers. And what you're doing is you're cutting them into even-sized pieces, like always four-bit pieces. four-bit pieces means you have 16 numbers, so hexadecimal notation. And so you need 16 buckets. And you need 16 of these 16 buckets. So you can sort 64-bit numbers, which are usually the largest integers that you can get in 16 passes through every array, which is quite fast, right? Because the size, so what you what you have at the end is if you have keys of size B bits, okay, this is somehow not very, not very, ah, come on! hitting the button has a delay, so it lags, as you would say. So, if you have keys of size B bits, you can take a redic size, of R bits, and for sorting, e.g., 64-bit numbers, 4-bit radics, which means hexadecimal, and then radic sort has a third order of B divided by R times n theta of that. So, this is basically what radic sort is doing. So, I don't go too much into detail. Who didn't get how it works? I will gladly explain it again, but if not, I'll just move to the next algorithm class. Okay, great. Oh, yeah. Maybe I forgot to change the projection. That's probably a good idea for, I'll keep this there for some seconds for the ones who are only watching the recording. So, this is the example with the digits, how radic sort works, and how I can sort the digits, and the algorithm itself is here, just to look at it in the recording. Okay, great. Now, let's turn this off again, so that you can see the blackboard. Okay, so this is radic sort. And there is basically the final one, which is bucket sort. And bucket sort basically uses the fact that your keys are drawn from some sort of uniform distribution. function. And which basically means you use some sort of uni, maybe even floating point keys or so, and you want to sort by that. And so, this is the algorithm of bucket sort. So, we start again, like for counting sort, with a new array, which we call B in this situation. And we produce, we empty B. So, B is an array of lists. And we start by emptying the lists. And then we go through the whole array. and then we take our keys, multiply them by n, and then we round it down, which converts our floating point numbers into integers. And then the Bs are the buckets, right? So, we just throw this thing into buckets. Now, what can happen is that, of course, several elements by chance end up in the same bucket. But then, of course, we also have holes somewhere because our new array B, the area of least, has the same size as our original array. And so, this is the fact that the keys are randomly distributed here in the interval 0, 1. If it's not the interval 0, 1, then we just divide by the size of the interval. It doesn't matter. So, we just assume that's the interval 0, 1. And so, what happens is basically the following idea. So, we have a sorted pile, so a sorted array of piles. Right? And then, we look at every element coming in and then, we throw the element onto one of the piles, depending on in which segment of the interval 0, 1, our keys lying. randomly, if the keys come in randomly, the piles will fill up randomly as well. And if the distribution is uniform, if it's really uniform, then very likely every pile at the end will contain an element. this is, and it will contain just one element. But sometimes it won't. But the chance that it contains two elements is already 1 over n to squared. Right? Because landing in one of the buckets has a chance of 1 over n for every element. So that two of them land in the same bucket is 1 over n squared. The three of them land in the same bucket is 1 over n cubed. Because they're independent, they're chosen randomly, uniformly distributed, so the probabilities multiply each other. Right? That's just basically, if you look at one of the piles, this is a Bernoulli experiment. Whether some new key lands on pile five is a Bernoulli experiment. because the chance landing there is exactly 1 over n. Right? The next one has again chance landing there of 1 over n. So if you look out from one of the buckets, something hitting you on the head is 1 over n for everything drawn. And so getting two keys thrown at your head has a chance of 1 or n squared. And so on. And so the chances that more elements end up in your bucket is actually polynomial or exponential actually. Sorry. It's exponential in the number of elements. And so what you get is at the end you have this list. And the lists usually are short. And so what you can do next is you can sort the lists by themselves. Because they should be short. And so you can choose any algorithm you like on the list. Usually what you do is you take an algorithm that works on lists and not on arrays. The interesting thing about lists, we will learn them in a few chapters, is you don't have random access into the lists, which is something you need for doing quick sort or other fast sorting algorithms. And so interestingly enough, that's why we learned insertion sort. Sorting lists can be done with insertion sort quite well because that only uses list operations. We will talk about this when we talk about lists. And so you use insertion sort to sort these short lists, which doesn't matter because theta of n squared is not so big because n is usually not larger than 2 or 3. So you can do the sorting quickly. then you just take the first element of the first list, the second, and so on. So just go through all the lists in sequence and produce your sorted array. So this is bucket sort. And I think that's the same thing as before. We don't have to discuss really in detail how this works. It goes through the array twice and does a very small sort. So this is an algorithm that depends on the data arriving in random in some sense. So if all the keys are not distributed in 0, 1, but distributed in the first part, then of course this is extremely bad because then one list grows indefinitely large. And this is not what you want. So you want to have random data in order to do bucket sort. But once you have random data, the expected runtime is again theta of n because all of the lists ending up is very small. many things end up in one list is very small. Okay, so this is the second one which is bucket sort. And again, I forgot to... This is so annoying. Always switching the camera is somewhat annoying. So... bucket sort. And this basically ends the algorithms for sorting. The next thing we're talking about are order statistics. And this is the next part of our discussion, which is order statistics. So what is an order statistic? I said this before in the introduction to sorting. So this is chapter nine. This is order statistics. And the question is... what is the i-th order statistic? The i-th order statistic in a set of n elements is the i-th smallest element. So the first order statistic is the minimum. And the n-th order statistic is the maximum of the array. And then there are the medians. The medians are the n-halved order statistic. And there is different definitions of the median. There is the statistical median, which is basically if you have an odd array it's just the middle element once sorted. If you have an even number of elements then usually statisticians say that's the average value of the two that are next to each other in the middle. In computer science we have the lower median and the upper median which is basically the element just below the middle and the element just above the middle. But which of them we are actually computing doesn't matter. Both of them work in the same way. The question is how can we select an element from an array? So let's look at the following selection problem. given an array A of size N of keys I write this of keys in parentheses and an integer I that is between 1 and N select the i-th smallest element from A. A other question is how fast can we solve that problem and let's assume all elements are different. Actually none of our algorithms will really use that fact. They work also if the elements are not different but defining the selection problem in a proper well-defined way is non-trivial because if you have many of them that are the same which one do you choose and then you have to do additional restrictions on which is actually the i-th do you want any of them do you want a specific one of them do you want one that has the lowest I don't know other lexicographical thing I forgot that's what I forgot by the way sorry about that about radix sort you can also use radix sort for lexicographical sorting what is lexicographical sorting it's the same way of sorting as you use in a for example phone book right so if a phone book if you still have phone books because I don't know anybody who still uses them but in former times there were phone books and they were sorted the names were sorted by first letter the second letter and so on which is called lexicographic sorting so you can use radix sort also for lexicographic sorting right so that's the same idea just sort by the last entry or by the sixth or whatever then you sort them okay anyway we're back to all the statistics and so the question is how can we do that and of course there is an obvious way there is an obvious way to do it and this is where we could sort our array first right so if you have our array we could sort it and once we've sorted it we just take the ith element from the bottom which of course solves all of the selection problems at once right so there is an obvious there is an obvious algorithm sort a and take a i and and since we we know how to sort whether this is a good algorithm or not very much depends on what kind of keys we have right so if we do know that the keys are integers no matter which size we could definitely we could definitely use radix sort or counting sort to sort the array and then this would be an order of n algorithm right if we don't know what the keys are and we do have to use a comparison sort then the effort would be order of n lgn because n log n is the lower limit on sorting an array by comparison sort right so either so effort effort is omega of n lgn unless we know something about the keys if we know something about the keys we can usually do it in theta of n now using that algorithm the algorithm is simple which is important so sometimes you just want to your areas are not huge and you want to quickly implement something right and you want to quickly implement something then it's probably easy you just take any of sorting algorithms and then you take the i element and you finish and you know it's right and you didn't do anything wrong but let's think about would you do the same way if you knew that you hadn't that you didn't have to select the smallest! you you don't have to sort it out right so you just take the first element and say smallest and then you go through the array once and compare it always and then you always remember what the smallest element was that you found right and that means you go through the array once which is quite much faster even faster than any of the counting sort stuff because you don't need intermediate arrays or anything I just go through it every once for calculating the minimum that works I think I have the algorithm somewhere there it is so let's project it on the black board it doesn't work that works so that's the minimum right so that's what we said we just take the minimum as the first array and then we just go through everything else and whenever our new element is smaller than the minimum we just choose the new element and we can choose whether we want to have the index only so then we say the minimal index is I or whether we want to have the element and just return the element itself so for minima this algorithm is fast it's order of n the question is can we do it faster is possible to get a faster algorithm with this one no no yeah no no no we if it's not it sorted right so if it's sorted then of course it's faster if we already know that sorted but if not well yeah exactly so it's impossible because you have to look at every element at least once and looking at every element at least once means this is exactly what the algorithm is doing it's looking at every element exactly once and it has to compare at least it does have to do at least n minus one comparison which is what the algorithm so this is optimal you cannot do better than that to get the minimum and the same is true for getting the maximum because well so the the first and the end all statistics can always be done in linear time and it can always be done fast so now an interesting question for all of you what if you want to get the minimum and the maximum at the same time so you want to have both you have the minimal and the maximum element of an array okay now the question is can you do it faster can you get it faster than that so just take a minimal element the maximum element and then it goes through and if you hit an element and you know that it's smaller than the minimum you keep it as the minimum otherwise if it's bigger than the maximum you keep it as okay so I'll give you an idea you take your array and you know the size and let's assume for the moment that your array has size 2 okay we start by taking the first two elements and we compare them with each other and the smaller one of them will be the minimum in the beginning and the larger one of them will be the maximum in the beginning okay then we take the next two elements and we compare them with each other because only the smaller of the two can become the minimum and the larger of the two can become the maximum so we take the next two elements compare them with each other and the smaller one we compare with the previous minimum and the larger of the two we compare with the previous maximum and whenever the the previous minimum is, you know what I mean? And then you take the next two elements. You first compare them with each other, and then you compare the smaller again with the minimum and the larger again with the maximum, and you go through a whole array. So let's count how many comparisons we have to do. So we have to compare n over two elements with each other, right? And then we have to do another comparison with the maximum and the minimum, but only once, right? So that means we don't have to do a two n comparison, but we only have three n over two comparison. So three half comparisons, right? So now the question, did this work perfectly if we have an even array? And having an odd array doesn't matter because for an odd array, we just use the first element and precede the minimum and the maximum with the first array, and then we continue in pairs of two, right? So this is a new idea. So if you want to find minimum and maximum, you can do it a bit faster than doing both at the same time. You just take the array two by two elements and first compare them with each other. Okay, so this is a possibility. So you can do order statistics quite fast. So that question is, can we do similar things when we want to have the ith element in the array? And of course, if we want to have the second smallest element, we can do something like that. So we can keep the two smallest elements and iterate through the array and do the same thing. So it is possible if I is very small to just tweak the algorithm that we used for the minimum a bit to get the Ith order statistics. Another question is, can we do it better than that? So can we always do it in linear time? And the interesting question, this is not so easy in reality. So usually what you need to keep, if I speak, you would need to keep a large list. And so the trick here is again to use some sort of randomized algorithm that is somehow inspired by quicksort. And this has an expected runtime of theta of n. And I will project that algorithm again on the blackboard. So this is randomized select. So let's check what randomized select is doing. So randomized select, oh, I have to turn the lights off again. So randomized select is basically using randomized partition that we already know from quicksort. It's the same partitioning method that we know from quicksort. And it's taking an array. It's taking a range in an array. So again, like for quicksort between P and R. And then it takes the index. So we want to have the Ith order statistics. So the I that is passed to randomized select is the I for the Ith order statistics. And so what we're doing first is we're checking whether we only have a single element. If we only have a single element, then by the recursive call that we've seen in a second, then we know that this is the element that we're looking for. So we make very sure that the last element we hit is actually the element for the Ith order statistics. Now, because we will assume that I is always in the range between P and R, basically. So between 1 and R minus P plus 1. That's anyway something that's written on the blackboard. Okay, great. So how do we do that? So we take randomized partition that we know from the quicksort algorithm. So we take and just to give you a reminder what randomized select is doing. It's randomly choosing a pivot element. And then it's dividing the array into all the elements that are smaller or equal to the pivot element and all the elements that are bigger than the pivot element by going through the array once. And then we have two parts of the array. Okay, now. What we then get is we look at where the pivot element actually lies. And this is K. And we check whether K is the Ith element of our array. Okay. If it's the Ith element of our array, we're finished. If it's not the Ith element of our array, we check whether I is in the left part of our partitioned array or whether I is in the right part of our partitioned array. Okay, so the pivot element cuts the array into pieces. And we're looking for the Ith largest element. So if I is smaller than the position of our pivot, we know that the Ith smallest element is in the low part of the array. And it's still the Ith element of the low part of the array because everything above is larger. If I is bigger than the position of the pivot element, then we know that all the elements below the pivot element and the pivot element itself cannot be the Ith smallest element. So the Ith smallest element has to be in the upper part of the array. And it's no longer the Ith smallest element of the upper part of the array, but it's the I minus Kth smallest element of the upper part of the array because all the K elements that are the pivot and below it no longer play a role. So we know that all of them are smaller, but on the upper part, we have the I minus Kth smallest element. And this is what is done. So randomized select is only called either on the smaller part, on the lower part, or on the upper part. And then we continue there. Then we again call randomized partition and so on. So we do not really sort the array, but what we do, well, we partially sort the array, so to speak, because randomized partition does sort the array a bit. Okay, now let's give an illustration on how that actually works. So we are looking for the fifth smallest element in our array. Okay, now we're looking at the fifth smallest element. So what we're doing is we're taking the fifth smallest element. We're just choosing that, for example, as a pivot, and partitioning our array. Okay, so we partition our array. And then we know that everything above 14 is in the upper part, and everything below is in the lower part, right? And we choose a random element again, which is four in that case. Four is the new pivot. So the new pivot intersects and discards everything that is below three and we have already discarded everything that is above 14, right? So the only active array where our fifth smallest element could be is in the section that is yellow. And we know now, because we've already discarded three elements below, that it has to be the second smallest element of the yellow array in the middle, which is noted down there. Okay, then we choose a random new element, which is 13. 13 is a bad choice because it just discarded a single element. Oh, it was unfortunate, yeah? And then we do another random choice, which is seven. Okay, seven is nice because it removes a large part of the array by sorting everything that was bigger than seven to the right and that was smaller than seven to the left. Okay, and we finish with a two element array, which is only consisting of five and six. And all the blue ones are already out of consideration. And well, yeah, and then we only, by chance, we choose the five and not the six. We had chosen the six. We would have been finished in the first, but if we'd chosen the five, then we also can discard the five. And in the last step, the only element which is still in consideration is the six. And as you can see, it's really the fifth smallest element. And in contrast to quick sort, what you can see is this partitioned the array only. It didn't sort the blue parts. It only ever sorted the yellow parts and it didn't really sort it. It only partitioned it in two sizes. What you can still see is the array is virtually unsorted. So the only thing is that everything below six is definitely before the six and everything above six is definitely past above the six. But inside the sub-arrays, we didn't do the sorting. So it's not really quick sort because it doesn't do a sorting of the array, but it partitions it until we really found the i-th order statistics. Another question is, what is the expected runtime of that algorithm, right? And I, what I say is that the expected runtime of the algorithm is theta of n, and we're going to prove that now. Okay, so randomized select has an expected runtime. So randomized select has an expected runtime. Runtime of theta of n. So you can actually, randomized with an expected runtime of theta of n, select every, at the i-th order statistic. And the algorithm itself is quite simple to implement. We will see in the next chapter that it's actually possible to do a deterministic way of getting the i-th order statistic in theta of n. But the algorithm is significantly more complicated. But it's still interesting as a theoretical idea. What is the worst case running time of randomized select? Well, it's the same as the worst case running time of quick sort. So it's theta of n squared, which, and again, it happens if the array is already sorted. So if you have, so basically, well, if it, no, if by chance you choose exactly those pivot elements that you would choose if the array were sorted. So if you replace randomized select by the ordinary select, then you would get that. Okay, so how do we know that randomized select is, in reality, theta of n expected runtime? So what is the idea? Well, what you would want to assume, so just let's go back to what we know about quick sort. So what do we know? Why did quick sort work? Why did quick sort have an expected run of time of theta and log n, right? Because we could show that there is the chance that all the choices for pivot elements that you make are bad. So don't cut the array into sub-arrays that have at least a fixed relation to each other is very small. And once you cut the array into fixed relation sub-arrays, then the depth of the quick sort suddenly goes down logarithmically, right? Okay, now let's think what happens if we are, again as before, let's think what happens if we are able to get our pivot to lie in the middle half of our array. Okay, so just our idea is, so we have this array from 1 to n, and then the middle half of the array is somewhere there. And we want to know what is the, just assume that our pivot element always lies in the middle half of that array. Okay, so what happens? If it always lies in the middle half of the array, randomized partition, partitions, the worst thing that can happen is that it either chooses this as the pivot element or chooses that as the pivot element. And so the worst thing that could happen is that the array, that one of the sub-arrays has size three quarters, and the other arrays has size a quarter of n. And then the worst thing that could happen is that the i-th smallest element always lies in the three quarter sized array. Right? This is the worst thing that can happen. So if we assume, if we assume that we always choose a pivot element that is in the middle half of the array, then the worst thing that can happen is that we always have to consider an array that has size three quarters of the array we had considered in the beginning. Okay? So then the runtime, T of n, is the runtime of three quarters of n. And then what we have to do inside of the array. And the worst thing that can happen is compare every element to one element, which is the pivot. So we have at most another theta of n effort. Of course, it even gets smaller by subdivision, but that's it. Okay, now, master theorem, and this is quite simple. This is case three. Master theorem implies that T of n is theta of n, which is dominated by the function f. So because the watershed function has a smaller, that goes actually to zero. So the theta of n dominates. Okay, now. So if we could assume that this is the case, the master theorem would tell us that our runtime is theta of n. So the question is, does this happen? So do we always get an element that is in the middle quarter? Well, actually, of course, not. We've just seen before in the example that we put on the blackboard that at least twice we chose an element that was the best possible pivot element to choose because it only reduced the size of the size of the size by one. But we are only interested in expected runtime. And so the interesting question is, what is the probability that we randomly choose an element that is in the middle part of the array as a pivot element? And this is simple to compute, right? Because every element to be chosen by randomized select has the same probability. And the size of the middle array is half the size of the whole array. And so the chance that we get an element in the middle has probability one half. And so every pivot element choice has a Bernoulli experiment chance of one half to be in the middle of the array. And a half that it is not. And so we can basically know the expected number of choices we have to make to end up in the middle of the array. And we know that this is one over P. So we have to make, on average, two choices to end up with an element that subdivides our array into at least a quarter and a three-quarter sized subarray. So every other choice, on average, that we make gets our array down to three-quarters of our original array. And the other doesn't do anything, basically. That's the worst case that can happen, right? And so, on average. And so these two things tell us that, well, we have to do twice a theta of n if we don't subdivide. Which doesn't matter because this only goes in there and it doesn't make this worse. We only have to go to the herring twice. And if we make a subdivision, we get it to three-quarters. So even in that case, we see that even if only every other choice that we make cuts the arrays down to three-quarters of the size, this recursion still works. And so this is the reason why it's theta of n. And now let's prove that informally in order to make sure that we know how this works. Okay, now let's prove that. So let's prove that randomized select has an expected runtime of theta of n. Okay, I'll do it on that blackboard. Okay, now. We introduce the following array parts. So let A, J be that part of A that still is in play in iteration J. And A, J, 0 of course, is equal to A. So we start with the whole array. And being in play means being yellow on the example that we had before. Okay, now. Okay, now. What we do know is that at least the pivot element is gone after one iteration. So what we do know is that A, 0, the size of A, 0 is still bigger, is bigger than the size of A, 1, and so on, is bigger than the size of A, N. So the sizes of A arrays are strictly sorted by size. So they're strictly monotonically decreasing. And now, if we call a partition or an iteration, i.e. a partition helpful, if A, J is smaller or equal to three quarters of the size of A, J minus one. Okay, the first lemma is a simple one. A partitioning is helpful with probability at least one half. So lemma nine one. One. A partition. A partition is helpful with probability greater or equal one half. And of course, we know that the chance that a partition is helpful only depends on the choice of the pivot element. And we do know that a partition is helpful if... So let's prove that. It is helpful if the pivot element is chosen in the middle part. Let's emphasize it. Let's emphasize it. Let's emphasize it more. It's helpful if... It's helpful at least if... If... Or at least when... The pivot element... Is chosen... Is chosen... In the middle part... Of... The array... That means... The pivot element... The pivot element... Is... Is... Between... N over fourth... Between... N over fourth... And... Three N... Over fourth... Order statistics... Of... Of... Of... The element... Of the array... Of the array... J minus one. Right? So if the pivot element is... Is between... The N over fourth... And... The three N over fourth... Element... Of the... As a between meaning... Bigger than that one... Or smaller than that one. There are other... Possibilities... So... This is... That's why... At least... Then it's helpful... It is helpful... In more situations... Than that. Right? It can even be helpful... If it's outside this... And by chance... I is in the correct part... Of the sub-array... That you choose. Right? So if you want to have... The fourth order statistic... And you... By chance... Choose the fifth... Smallest element... Of a... Ten million size... Then this is also... Very helpful... Even if you choose... Your pivot element... Not in the middle half... So there can be... Even more helpful... Choices than that... But... Every choice... That satisfies... This requirement... Is definitely helpful... Yeah? There are more... But these are... Definitely helpful... And now we only have to... And... What the idea is... And... The chance... That some of this situation... Happens... Is one half... So... And one... Of... And the probability... The probability... One half... And so... The probability is at least one half... Because we have other choices... That also lead to... A favorable outcome... Okay... So this is 9.1... This is simple... And... Now we have... Theorem 9.2... And it says... That the... Procedure randomized select... Has an expected... Runtime of theta of n... So... Theorem 9.2... 9.2... The expected... Runtime... Of randomized select... Runtime... Of randomized select... Is theta of n... Okay... Let's prove that... Um... Um... Now... Um... Not every partitioning is helpful... So we have partitionings... Not every partitioning is helpful... But... Um... Let... H... Um... One... H2... H3... And so on... So the sequence... Um... Be... The... Sequence... Of helpful partitions... And of course we have that... H1... Is smaller... Than H2... Is smaller than H3... And so on... Um... Um... This is just... The set of... J's... Um... Where... The partitioning is helpful... And... So... The last helpful partition is... Hm... And... After the last helpful partition... We have finished... The number... M... Is... Um... The number... M... Of helpful partitions... Is... Um... The number... M... Of helpful partitions... Is... A random variable... Is... A random variable... Right? Um... Okay... Great... Now... Um... So what we need to... Uh... What we need to calculate... Is... Uh... The expected value of M... Um... Okay... Great... Um... Okay... Great... Um... Um... So what we need to... Uh... What we need to calculate... Uh... The expected value of M... Why? Um... Because... Let's... Let's... Let's see what happens... Let's... Let's say that... The algorithm... Runs... Uh... Like in our example... Until... We have only a single... Element left... Right? So let's... Assume... That it's... The single element... When if... There's only a single element left... If we're finished... The algorithm ends... And so... Um... We can count... The number... Of... Helpful... Partitions... That we can at most have... Because every helpful partition... Our error... Cuts our... Area down to at least... To at most... A third... Of its original size... Right? So... Um... After the first helpful partition... The size is... Three quarters of a... Three quarters of n... After the second sub... Division... It's three quarters... Times... Three quarters of n... Which is... Three quarters squared... Of n... So... After the mth helpful partition... Is three quarters to the m... Times n... And... We can easily calculate... When this is below one... Or... Or... Or... Smaller than one... Which is just a logarithmic thing... So we know that the logarithm of four thirds of n... Rounded down... So we can have most... We can... Have... At most... Um... Logarithm... Of... Four thirds of n... Rounded down... Helpful partitions... Helpful partitions... At the end of that... We're finished... Because then only... A single... Uh... Array... Stays there... Okay... Now... Um... What we also do know... Is... After... Um... After... So... Let's... So that's the upper bound... On helpful partitions... Now... Um... What we do next... Is we define... A random variable... And the random variable tells us... What's the gap... Between two helpful partitions... So... H... K... Is defined as... Plus... Minus... H... K... This is the gap... The size... Of... The gap... Or... The number of iterations... Let's say... The number of iterations... Iterations... Iterations... Between... Helpful... ...Petition... K... And... K... And... K... Plus... One... And... For... The definition... For... The definition... For... The definition... We set... H... Zero... To... Zero... At... Just... Convention... Okay... So... Then... We have... X... K... For... K... Equals... Zero... To... M... Minus... K... To... M... Minus... To... Minus... One... To... To... Log... Quarter... Log... Four... Thirds... No... Yeah... Okay... Now... What do we know? We do know... That the chance... That a probability is helpful... Is at least... One half... And so... What we do know... Is... Since... Um... Every... Every... Um... Partition... A... Bernoulli experiment... With... Greater... Equal... To... One half... Um... Of... Being... Successful... Of... Being... Helpful... Uh... The... Expected... Value... Of... Of... Being... Being... Helpful... Uh... The... Expected... Value... Of... Expected... Value... Of... X... Is... Equal... To... Two... For... All... Case... Okay... Now... What we have to... The... Effort... Of... Randomized... Select... Randomized... Select... This is important... Effort... Randomized... Select... Is... The... Number... Of... Comparisons... Have... To... What... We... Have... To... Estimate... Is... The... Number... Of... Comparisons... Have... To... Is... Basically... The... The... Pivot... Element... And... Then... We... Compare... Every... Other... Element... It's... One... Less... But... We... Don't... Care... About... The... One... Less... We... Just... Care... About... Basically... The... The... Effort... Is... Helpful... Partitions... And... Then... What... We... Have... To... Sum... All... The... Comparisons... Have... To... Make... First... Helpful... And... The... Have... To... To... H... K... One... Minus... One... Um... Uh... Plus... X... Um... Of... The... Size... A... J... So... That's... What... You... H... Sorry... H... Plus... One... And... This... Is... The... Sum... Of... J... Equals... H... To... H... K... Minus... One... Of... A... J... Right... Okay... Now... We... Have... To... H... K... Size... H... K... Is... Something... We... Do... Because... This... Small... Or... And... The... Sum... K... Equals... Zero... To... M... Minus... So... We... The... Size... Is... Three... Quarters... To... K... Times... N... Even... We... Know... That... All... The... A... K... Is... Bounded... Three... Quarters... To... The... K... Now... We... Can... Compute... The... The... The... Of... That... Sum... M... Minus... 1... J... Equals... H... K... To... H... K... 1... 1... The... Size... A... J... This... Is... Then... Small... Or... Equal... The... Expected... Value... Of... The... Sum... K... Equals... Zero... To... Minus... 1... X... K... Three... Quarters... To... The... K... Times... N... Which... Is... Equal... To... The... Expected... Value... Of... X... Times... N... The... Expected... Value... Of... X... K... Smaller... Equal... Equal... To... Minus... 1... Of... 2... Times... N... And... This... Smaller... Equal... 2... Times... The... Sum... Of... 3... Quarters... To... 2... And... Well... This is a geometric series... And... We know... That... This is equal... 2... 2... N... Times... 1... 1... Minus... 3... Quarters... 1... 1... 1... 1... 1... And... This is... The expected runtime... Of the algorithm... And the other way around... We have to do... At least... N-1 comparisons... As before... So... The lower bound... Being... Theta of N... Omega of N... Is trivial... So we've seen that the runtime, so T of n, therefore T of n is big O of n. And of course, also omega of n. It has to be omega of n because we have to look at each element at least once. And so, therefore, we've proved that the expected runtime definitely is T of n. Okay, so we're almost finished. There's one more thing we will discuss, which is the next algorithm, which is the select algorithm. The select algorithm is really complicated, as you can see. It's really long. This is the one I promised. So this is the algorithm that is actually provable, a deterministic algorithm that does the same thing in T of n. So there is a possibility to get the i-th order statistics in runtime T of n. But it looks a bit awkwardly long. And so probably it's also a recursive algorithm. It's basically doing the same thing as randomized select, but it doesn't do it randomized. It selects it in a nice recursive way. So the idea of the select algorithm is the only thing in randomized select that is randomized is the selection of the pivot element. Right? So there is only one random thing, and this is selecting the pivot element in random. And what this select algorithm is actually doing, it is selecting the pivot element somewhat optimally by doing a recursive call on the array for selecting the pivot element. And both of these recursive calls are balanced so that we still get a fixed reduction in size. It's no longer three quarters, but it's nine tenths, but which is still smaller than one. So by the master theorem, we still get the theta of n runtime. So the idea of select is to make sure that we can deterministically select a pivot element so that the overall thing basically is bounded by nine tenths of the size of the array. And we can use Akrabazzi then to show that this is an algorithm that has theta of n runtime. And so what is it doing? It's basically starting by reducing the array that we're looking at to an array that has a multiple of five elements. And the first array, the first while loop runs most, so between lines one and ten, it runs at most four times. So either never or once or twice or three times or four times. And it always rearranges the elements in the beginning of the array so that the smallest element comes first. And if by chance we have to get the i's order statistic, which is in the first four elements, then we are finished and we return, which is in seven. Otherwise, we just sort always the smallest element to the beginning and reduce the i by one. And so what we do is we end up with a remaining array that has size, which is a multiple of five. And then we group the array, which is a multiple of five, in columns of five. And I can show you how this looks like. So now we have an array that is a multiple of five. And all of them are then sorted. So all of these five element things are sorted by a fixed sort of five elements, which is also order of one. And so what we end up with is we end up with a set of columns of five elements each. And then we sort the medians of these elements. So we sort only the medians of them. And then we get a sorted list of five element things. And what we do know is that if we take the one in the middle as the pivot element, what we know is that all the blue elements are definitely smaller than x. And all the yellow elements are definitely greater or equal to x. And we don't know anything about the white ones. That's because they are sorted ascendingly. So an arrow in there gets from a lower element to a higher element. And this is everything that is known inside of the algorithm. And we will discuss the remaining of the algorithm tomorrow because I've just seen that in the lower right corner it says 9.30. And so we're finishing today and we're discussing again tomorrow. It's anyway good if we explain it twice. So see you again tomorrow in the morning. And continuation of here. Bye-bye.
