Thank you. Test. Yeah. Okay, great. Now, let's start again. So, last week, we've been talking about hash tables and what they can do. And I was a bit rushed last week. And during the rushing, I made a mistake, which I want to correct today. So, I said that for double hashing, when you want to delete something, so if you have the hash tables that are, for example, filled by double hashing, then I said if you want to delete something, it just follow it to the end. And then you take the last element and copy it back. And this is in principle true, but it's only true for very special double hash functions. For example, for linear hashing, which is one of the most important double hash functions nowadays, even if in former times it was disregarded, it's not very good. Because nowadays, due to introduction of CPU caches, it is very important to understand that algorithms that completely work inside the CPU cache, especially if they work inside the level one cache are much faster than other functions that have to retrieve memory from either the level two cache or from the main memory, from the main RAM, because access to the CPU internal cache is much, much faster. And the internal CPU cache is more or less filled automatically by memory access with memory management units that are not directly involved in calculating. So, therefore, linear hashing has become more and more favorable nowadays. The advantage with linear hashing is that the second hash function is constant. You can remember that double hashing works by having two hash functions. And the first hash function gives you the initial position of your element. And the second hash function tells you how far the second, third, fourth, and so on element are apart from each other. Right? So, and if you have a hash collision, you try the next position, the next position, the next position, and so on. This works wonderful. And in linear hashing, you just take that you have the constant hash function one, but it can also take other constant hash functions. Distant two, three, whatever you like. As long as they're constant. Because when they're constant, you know that if you have a hash collision and you try to fill up, then no matter which element in this chain you have, all of them have their next position and their previous position determined basically by your hash key. Right? And the only thing you have to check then is whether these elements actually sit at their primary position or not. Whether you can fill it back or not. And if you do double hashing with two different hash functions, you cannot easily fill it back. Because you don't know what the first, second, or third possible position of the other element is that you want to take to fill it back. Because if you have two different hash functions, two different elements have different favorite first position, second position, third positions. If you take the last element in this chain, then this might not even be an element that fits to the first position. Right? If you have hash functions that are, that are not, have not the same stepping. And so then you need the delete marker. This is different if you have, for example, linear hashing. Unless you, the last element in the chain is an element, is an element that sits at its first primary position. So it doesn't fit back into the hole that you just put. And then you have to do something else. And then you have to do something else. And you have to do some other fill mechanisms. But they can, most of the time, do by fill mechanisms. And the chance that it works is also depending on the fill status of the hash table. So this is only what I wanted to do. Because once I left the lecture room and went down, I remembered that I mixed this up in the struggle to finish early with my intended part of the presenting material. So this is a correction from last time. The second thing I want to talk about. No, the next thing I want to talk about are binary search trees. So which is the content of today's lecture course. And this is paragraph 12 in the book. And it's binary search trees. And I mentioned them already a bit in when we introduced the data structure of a binary tree. So what is a binary search tree? A binary search tree is a tree that has the following property. So a binary tree is a binary search tree. A binary search tree. If it has the binary search tree property. And this is the following. If X is any node in the tree. All nodes in its left subtree satisfy all nodes Y. In its left subtree satisfy that Y dot key. Y dot key. Small recall X dot key. And all nodes. In its right subtree. In its right subtree. In its right subtree. Satisfy. Satisfy. Or set. Satisfy. Set dot key. Is greater equal X dot key. So providing two examples of that is here. So those are binary search trees. I know that now I'm having to juggle this thing again, which is a bit annoying. So no, that's the wrong one. That's the right one, two. I have to type two. Okay, so what you can see is this is a typical search tree. So if you look at the elements, the keys in the nodes, as you can easily see, the six is the root here, and its left subtree consists of two fives and a two. The right subtree consists of a seven and eight, and clearly the six shades, the elements that are bigger than six or greater equals six, and those that are smaller equals six into two parts. But the other tree on the left contains the same numbers. But as you can see, this is also a valid search tree. So the search tree property does not uniquely determine how the search tree actually looks like. It can be very, let's say, balanced as the left tree in the example, and it can be quite imbalanced as the right tree in the example. So why is this important to know? Because this somehow tells us what we have to look for when we are... Okay, I have to make it dark again. So this is very stupid, how this works, but if we want to have it light, I have to turn it off first, which is very helpful in a lecture room. Okay, anyway, let's get rid of that again. So what we've seen is basically how a binary search tree might look like and what its important properties are. Now, what can we do? Yes, but this is getting darker, right? Why? Okay, anyway, because I said the lighting is stupid. Maybe I was offended. Okay, anyway. Now, trees, yeah, we have to make it somehow balanced, right? Right, so this is one of the things, and why. This is what we're talking about first. So, apparently, so trees are used for ordered sets. And therefore, they can do all the operations that ordered sets provide. So, of course, they can, let's talk, they can search, because they're a search tree. So we definitely want to search. We want to insert new nodes, and we want to delete nodes. And, what else does a sorted sets have, it has a minimum, it has a maximum, it has successor, and it has predecessor. So all of these operations can be simply done on binary search trees. And before we start to learn how to balance these trees, what we first will do is we will first talk about how we can perform all of these operations on a binary search tree and how fast we can do all of these operations in a binary search tree. And this will tell us what we have to make sure the binary search tree satisfies in order to get the best performance out of it. So what we have not yet talked about in trees are tree walks. So trees are there for being walked. So what is a tree walk? A tree walk is a way of traversing the nodes of a tree in order to perform some operation on them. Like, for example, printing them or getting an ordered list or something like that. So the first algorithmic operation we perform on our banner search tree is using the keys and the structure of the tree to get the ordered list, let's say, printed out. And there are basically three typical tree walks that are done on binary trees. And the one that gives us a sorted list of all the elements is the so-called in-order tree walk. So tree walk usually works recursively. So we start at the route, then we traverse any of the two subtrees, and in between, well, we traverse any of these subtrees and perform something on the node itself, right? So the tree works recursively. It performs something on the node, and then it passes down to the children. And depending on when the operation is performed on the node itself, we have either a pre-order tree walk. A pre-order tree walk first performs the operation on the node, and then descends down to the subtree, to the children. A post-order tree walk first descends down to the children, and then performs the operation on the node. And then in-order tree walk of a binary tree first descends down the left subtree. Then when it's coming back, it performs the operation on the node, and then it descends down to the right subtree, which is the exact thing. So I will project it again to the blackboard. This is the – well, let me make it bigger. Okay. Can you read it, actually, or do I have to turn off the lights again? I probably have to turn off the lights again. Okay, so the in-order tree walk, as I said, it first – so when the node is not – if the node is not nil, so if it's not nothing, then we first go down the left subtree, right? We go down to the left child first. And when we come back, we print the key, or we do something with the node, for example, printing the key. And then we go down the right lane of the tree. Now let's go back to our example, which is up there. So whenever we do that, no matter where, let's take the left tree first. So what are we doing? We start with the root. The root is the 6 up there. Then we're going down first to the left subtree. The left subtree is the 5. The 5 has still children. So we go further down to the left subtree, which is the 2. Then we go further down, which doesn't do anything, because 2 is already a leaf, so its child is nil. And so we print the 2, right? Then we return from the recursive call from the 5, and we print the 5, the 5 that is the upper 5. Then we descend down the right subtree of the 5, going to the other 5, printing the next 5. Then we go back up. We finished with the right subtree, so we're going back up, going back to the 6. Now we finished the left subtree of the 6, so we print the 6. Then we descend down the right path. The right path goes to the 7, which doesn't have a left subtree. So we print the 7, then we go down to the 8, which doesn't have a left subtree, which we print the 8. And so we get the 2, 5, 5, 6, 7, 8, and so we've printed the keys in sorted order. And the same can be done with the other side. So why does this work? Because of the binary search tree property. The binary search tree property says that all the nodes in the left subtree have keys that are small or equal to the key on the node. So this search tree property makes sure that if we do an in-order tree walk, we first print out everything that is on the left subtree, which is known to be small or equal to the key of the node. Then we print down the key of the node, and then we go down to the right subtree. And by the binary search tree property, we know that all the elements on the right subtree have keys that are greater or equal to the key at the node. And so just the binary search tree property guarantees that the in-order tree walk produces the elements in sorted order. So this is simple, right? Simple to see. Okay, now it's getting dark again. So wait, maybe I should do it like this. Okay. I'm juggling with this thing. It's a bit annoying. Okay, great. Now, what is important to understand? That, of course, this is theorem 12.1. 12.1. An in-order tree walk takes theta of n time. Okay. In-order tree walk takes theta of n time. So why does it do that? Well, it's quite simple because we actually find every node exactly once. Of course, we can prove this by our favorite loop invariants or whatever. But I think it's quite easy to see that every node is hit exactly once because a node is either in the left subtree of the root or it's in the right subtree of the root. Or it's the node itself whenever you start in a subtree. Whenever you start at any point, the subtree is again a tree. And so a node is either the root of the subtree or it's in the left or in the right part. And the root is used exactly once. And this is true over all of the tree. So every node is used exactly once. So we do have theta of n operations. And if you want to have another proof, it's written in the book. Okay. So this is the in-order tree walk. Now, what we are talking about now is searching. Searching is the next algorithm we're talking about, which is here. And the nice thing about the binary search tree is that it somehow takes the idea of binary search, right, in an array, and puts it into a data structure. So if we want to find something, we start at any node, right? And we do know that if we look for a key, it only has three possibilities. Either the key is the same as the key of the node when we're basically finished. Or we know that if the key is smaller than the key of the node, we know that it has to be in the left subtree. And if the key is greater, it is greater than the key at the node. We know it has to be in the right subtree. And this is exactly what binary tree search or tree search is doing. It's checking whether we are done. We are done if x is nil or x is the key. So if the key of x is the key k, then we are done. Then we can return x. So if x is nil, so if we ended up in nil, the key is not in there, and we return nil. And if we found it, then we found it. Nice. So then we have two possibilities. Either the key is smaller than the key of the current node. Then we have to look further in the left subtree of the node. So we call it recursively. Or if it is bigger, which is the other possibility, then we know it's in the right subtree of the node, and we traverse the right subtree of the node searching for it. So this is quite simple to understand. The other one is if you don't want to do it recursively, you can also do it iteratively. So because you don't need to go back during the recursive search, you can just change where you are. So here dx plays the role of the current position in the tree. So if you are there again, you just return it, and otherwise you change your current position. So this is the iterative idea. You don't call it recursively, but you change your current position. So you shift either to the left sub, to the left child, or you shift your current position to the right child to continue searching. So often binary search as a search on a binary tree is implemented in the iterative way. Why? Because it doesn't need a stack. It is faster usually because you only take one local variable, which tells you where you just sit, which is your current position, which is the x. And then you shift your current position by changing the local variable, which is usually much faster than doing a recursive search. So just remember that many of the tree operations actually work by doing iterative approaches and not recursive approaches like here. Is there any question about that, or is it simple enough that it just can pass on to the next thing? Okay, great. Now, there is one thing we need to talk about again, which I'm, and that's why I'm scrolling back to the picture we had in the beginning, and I was always talking about the upper element, the upper tree, and not talking about the lower picture. And the lower picture is very important as well, because what we can see there is how binary search trees are usually implemented in order to get everything out of the data structure, especially when it comes for inserting and deletion. So when we talked about implementing a surgery, how it is represented in a data structure, a binary tree, we had several methods, but what the important one was we had the key, and then we had a left pointer, and we had a right pointer, right? The left pointer points to the left child, the right pointer points to the right child. But for search trees, it's also very important to remember in every child what its parent is. So like double linked lists who remember where every node remembers what its predecessor in the list is and what its successor in the list is. In search trees, it is very important that we not only knew the descendants of the node, but also the parents of the nodes. And so every node will have three pointers, a pointer to the left, a pointer to the right, and a pointer to the parent apart from possible pointers to the data we carry, right, and the keys. But this is important. And we will need this throughout the operations on the trees. We will need all the three pointers. So it's important for these balanced trees that we remember everything, not only the children, but also the parents. And this is depicted in these two diagrams, where we can see both pointers, the pointers to the children and the back pointers to the parents. So this is something we need to remember. Okay, great. Now that we know how we can search things, we have to think about how to find the maximum and the minimum of a tree. And this is also trivial because the maximum of the tree, of course, is, as we can see, the rightmost leaf of the search. So the, no, not the rightmost leaf, the rightmost element of the search tree. So we're going right until we cannot go right anymore. Because this is then a node that doesn't have a right subtree. And if it doesn't have a right subtree, there is no element, there's no node with a key that is bigger. So we're going right, right, right, right, right, right, until we cannot go right anymore. Then we're in the largest elements. And the same is true for the minimum. We go left, left, left, left, left, until we can't go left anymore. Because the only node that doesn't have a left child is the minimum. And the only node that doesn't have a right child is the maximum. And so this is also very simple to find the minima and the maxima of a binary search tree. Okay, now, so these are the trivial operations. The next interesting one is how to find the successor or the predecessor of a search tree. And, well, the tree, the predecessor works exactly as the successor, but the other way around, so we only have to think about one of them. And here we have to actually distinguish two possibilities. If we are at the node and we want to find the next possible element, well, if we do have a right subtree, right, then we know that the next element, the successor in the list, has to be in the right subtree of the node because it has to be greater or equal to the node's key. So it has to be bigger than the node's key. So it has to be in the right subtree. This is something we know. And which element is it? Well, it's the first element we hit in traversing the tree, which is the smallest element of the right subtree. The smallest element of the right subtree is the next element in the list. Okay, so this is simple. This means if the node does have a right subtree, we just look for the smallest element in the right subtree. And finding the smallest element basically means doing all the left. So we go to the right and then all to the left until we cannot go left anymore and we have the next element. So this is true if it does have a right subtree. But if it does not have a right subtree, then it's more complicated, right? So then we have two possibilities. Either we are the maximum. The maximum doesn't have a successor and we're finished, right? But otherwise, what could happen is if we think about traversing the tree, right? So how do we find the successor in principle? So we do our in-order tree walk because the in-order tree walk prints out the nodes in their correct order. So what we need to do is we need to find the next element in the in-order tree walk. And when we hit in the in-order tree walk, when we are at a point where we don't have any right subtree anymore, meaning that we are starting to return. So usually, if you remember, the in-order tree walk works recursively. So we start by traversing the left tree, and then when we come back from the recursive call to the left tree, we print the node and then we traverse the right tree, right? And when we've traversed the right tree, we ourselves return to our parent, right? So this is how an in-order tree walk works. And the successor says that we need to get the next element in the in-order tree walk. So if we don't have a right child, we need to return to our parent, right? And then, of course, we have to check what our parent is doing. So maybe our parent is okay and we are the left child. If we are the left child of our parent, then our parent has the next higher number because then we return from the left. However, if we are the right child of our parent, then we are bigger than our parent, and our parent has the return as well because then we are in the return phase. So what we need to do is we need to hop back to parents until we hit a node where we have been the left child because then this is the next element. And once we're back at the root node and we have never found the left child, then we are also finished. So this is what the second branch is doing. It's actually checking. As you can see, it looks at the parent, right? So it looks at its parent. And if the parent is not nil, if the parent is nil, then we're at the root and we're finished, we cannot look anymore because then we've traversed everything. If the parent is nil and we've come from the right, then we have to continue going up, which means we just do our current pointer as x points to the parent now, and we go to the next parent, to the grandparent, so to speak, and continue from there. So we traverse up as long as we come from the right. And once we did not come from the right, which is whether x is equal to y.right, if we don't come from the right, then we're finished because then this is the next node. And if we're coming from the right until we're at the root node, then we were at the maximum because then all the things we did is traverse the right node tree. So this is finding the successor. And of course, the predecessor just works the other way around. So you just exchange everything that is a minimum by a maximum and exchange everything that is a right by a left. So finding the predecessor means x.left is not nil return tree. Maximum x.left. And so it just replaces every right by left and every left by right. Then you can find the predecessor. Is this clear? A good idea is to think this through once, right? So this is sometimes one of the first hurdles in understanding trees. But I think it's still simple enough to understand. Okay, great. So this finishes what we want to do. The only thing that is left is theorem 12.2. And theorem 12.2 tells us the following. Oh, I think I forgot to. Oh, yeah. It's always the same. So I keep it there just for the others. So let's turn on the lights again. Okay. Okay, now theorem 12.2. Which is important. All these operations. Search. Minimum. Maximum. Successor. Predecessor. So all of these search operations. All operations. So the operations. Search. Minimum. Maximum. Successor. Predecessor. Have a runtime. Have a runtime. Of theta of h. If h. Is the height. Of the binary search tree. Okay. Okay. So why is this too well? This is quite simple to see. Let's talk about, well, search. So whenever you search a node, you take a recursive step to a child if you don't find it, right? So, and the recursive step just adds one more comparison. It adds one more comparison to the key of the node you're at. And so, what you make sure is that since you traverse from a node to a child in every single step of the search or of the success operation, you traverse up. For the predecessor operation, you traverse up. For the minimum and maximum, you traverse down. And for the search operation, you traverse down. But every step always either goes to a parent or goes to a child. So every step changes the level of the node you're at. So the search operation goes down by one level. So it cannot go further down than the height of the tree. So since every node that you compare to is at least one level down or is exactly one level down as compared to the node you were previously, you actually can take no more steps than the height of the tree. And the other way is the successor operation. You might traverse up one level in the tree by going the backwards path or might traverse down one level of the tree by looking for the minimum node of the right subtree. So all of these operations, again, either take a complete step up or a complete step down. So therefore, both of them also work in half at least, half at most age steps. Okay. So this is also, I think, simple to see. Now, what does this help us? Well, that helps us insofar as we need to make sure that our trees have minimal possible height. Because all the operations work in height, in order of the height of the tree, feet of the height of the tree, actually. We need to make sure that the height of the tree is disbounded. So this is a binary tree. And for binary trees, we already have discussed a few things, even in the exercises class. For example, we have already discussed also during the recursive analysis proves that the height of a binary tree is theta. So the minimum height, the minimal possible height of a binary tree is basically the logarithm of the number of elements in the tree rounded up. So this is something we already know. So therefore, if we have an optimal binary tree of best possible height, all of these operations will run in theta of LGN steps. Okay. Okay. Now, what we do not yet know is whether we can do the same with inserting or deleting nodes from a binary search tree. So these will be the next operations we need to talk about. So we now did all this stuff that is related to our audit set. But what we have not yet done is the dynamic operations that change our binary search tree by inserting or deleting new nodes. And so the next operation we need to talk about, and this is the simpler one, is how to insert stuff in a binary tree. And in order to understand how this works, insert always inserts the new node as a leaf. Okay. So new nodes in the standard binary tree insert operation are always inserted as a leaf. So insert works by first looking for that node in the tree whose leaf it should be. So how do we do that? Well, let's look at the operation. We start. So we want to insert a new element into the tree T. If we start at the root node. Oh, I have to turn the lights down again. So we start at the root node. And then we remember in Y the parent node where we want to insert our new element. Okay. So Y will be used to store the parent node of the new element. So what do we do? We start at the root node and then we traverse the tree until we hit nil. So we traverse it until we reach a leaf of the tree. Okay. Okay. So when we are not nil, we remember our current element Y. So Y is used to remember X or X. And then we check whether the new key is smaller than the key of our current position, which is X. And if it is smaller, then we know it has to go to its left subtree. So we shift our current position to the left. If it's bigger, then we know we have to go to the right subtree. So we shift our current position to the right. Until we are at a leaf. Okay. When we are at a leaf, then we know two things. We know that we have remembered in Y the last node that we've been at. Right? So this is always the point. Now we are at nil, so we have just traversed down the leaves. And Y just remembers where we came from. So that's the first thing we know. We know that this node where we were at will now be the new parent of our node. So this is what we remember. So the parent of Z, which is Z.p, will be a new Y. Okay. So if Y is nil, so if the parent is nil, then the tree was empty. And this is our new node. So this is the first node in the tree. So we have to store it in the root of the tree. Otherwise, we have to decide whether we put it to the left or to the right of the parent. And this, of course, depends on the relation of the two keys. If the key of Z is smaller than the key of its new parent, then we have to put it to the left. And otherwise, we have to put it to the right. So these are the two possibilities. And this is how insert works. So let's see whether we have a picture of that as far as I remember we have. So let's see here. We want to add the new element 13 to the tree we already had. So the tree that is painted except for the 13 was the old tree. So how is it working? Well, it's checking. It starts at the root. And it compares the 13 to the 12. The 13 is bigger than the 12. So the 13 has to live in the right subtree of 12. So it goes to the right and compares to 18 now. 18 is known to be bigger than 13. So the 13 has to live in the left subtree of the 18. So it goes down to the next. The next is the 15. And so again, of course, 13 is smaller than the 15. So it has to go down to the left of the 15. But the left of 15 is empty. And so we know that the 15 will be the parent of the 13. And then we have to check whether 13 is really smaller than the 15 it is. So we're going to, we're putting it there. Okay. So this is how we insert a node into a binary search tree. And of course, this operation will not make sure that the tree is in any way balanced. Because if the nodes come in, for example, ascending order, then we will put the first node in the root, which is then the smallest. Then we put the next element to the right of it. And if then again, and the bigger element is coming, we're again putting it to the right and to the right and to the right. And at the end, we will end up with a binary search tree that looks like a very expensive list. Because it also has all the left pointers, which are empty. And so this cannot be the perfect way to do something. But still, this is the elementary insert operation in a binary tree. And so binary trees, if we want to make sure that they're somewhat balanced, we have to make sure that we balance the tree afterwards in some way. And this will be done in the next. So we will learn one possibility in the next, and we will learn another possibility then in the exercises. Okay, but this is the basic insert operation. And before we start doing balancing, we need to talk about how to delete elements from a binary search tree. Because this is the more difficult operation, deleting them. Okay, so I think insert is still understandable. And as we can see, and this is also important, inserting an element in a binary search tree using this operation is also an order of age. When age is the height of the tree. Why? Because of the same way of iterating. We are taking a comparison. We're taking the comparison. And whether we're left or right, we're traversing one step down. So every step in the iteration goes one step down in the binary search tree until we hit the bottom. And then we just have an order of one operation that inserts the new element. So since we're going down in one step, this is also theta of the height of the tree. Okay, now, the next question is, how can we delete elements from a binary search tree? And deletion is a bit non-trivial. And so we need to talk about this first before we can actually do it. Why? Which means that I have to get... Why? Not only does it have to be turned off to be turned on again. If you do it too fast, it gets in a strange intermediate stage, which doesn't turn on all the lights. Okay, anyway. So, if we want to delete a node on a binary search tree, we cannot just rip it out. Right? Because we have to do something with the two subtrees. So inserting is easy. Because inserting basically means adding one new node somewhere down there that points to its parent. But if we want to remove a node from the tree, usually we have to do it in the middle of the tree and not just as one of the leaves. If we have to remove one of the leaves, things are easy. We just remove it. And we still have a binary tree. So the bad thing is if you have to remove something that is in the middle of the binary tree. And the middle of the binary... Why is it bad? Because we have two subtrees, but only one parent. So we have to decide how to put the two subtrees somehow to the parent. Right? Inserting is simple. Because we have two possibilities and we only have to put in one thing. But removing is difficult because we remove something and then we have two dangling pieces, but only one point to put them. And so we have to decide how to weld them together. And so, as I said, if we have a leaf, then it's simple. If it has only one leaf, it's also... If it has only one child, it's also simple. We just attach the child to the parent. So the difficult thing is if we have two live children, so we have to do something. Okay, so... Now, and we have to... Of course, why is it difficult? Because we have to keep the binary search property. Right? So this is the important thing of a binary tree. We have to keep the binary search property. If we only have a simple, a single leaf, this is always still true. If we have two leaves, if we have two children, two subtrees, we have to make sure that the binary search tree property is still true. Okay. Okay. Now, what we need to understand is the successor of our node in the tree is in the right subtree. And the idea of deletion is we take the successor of the node and put it to where the deleted node was before. Okay? Why is the successor nice? Because we know that the successor of the node cannot have a left child. Right? Because otherwise it couldn't be the successor of the node. So the successor of the node will not have a left child. Which means that when we found the successor of the node, we can put the successor of the node to where the node was. And then we can attach the left subtree of our node to the successor because we know that the successor doesn't have a left child. Okay? So this is the idea of deletion. The simple checks first. If we have a leaf, we just remove us. If we have only one child, we remove and attach our child to our parent. If we have two children, we look first for the successor of us, which doesn't have a left child because it's our successor. Then we put our successor to where we were and put our left subtree as the left child of the successor node. Of course, we could also do this with the predecessor and the right child. But usually, the algorithm is using the successor. Let's have a look at the possibilities in pictures. Because usually, pictures are simpler than the algorithms. Okay. So, we want to delete. So, which is not depicted, of course, is if the node doesn't have any children. Because this is the simplest case. We just remove it. So, here, the first two possibilities are also simple. The node has only a right child or the node has only a left child. Then we just attach the left or right child to the parent, which is here, Q, and we're finished. This is simple. Okay. Now, the next possibility is what we've been talking about. So, we want to remove always the blue node. So, we have the node Y. The node Y is the, if it's the right child and it doesn't have a left child, it's the successor of Z. And we can just remove the Z, put the left child of Z as the new left child of Y. And we end up, this is the third possibility. The other possibility is the more complicated one. That is, the successor of Z is a Y that is further down in the tree. Now, if it's further down in the tree, we have, this is the dashed lines, right? The dashed lines mean there can be many hops between the Z and the Y, which is the successor. The Y is the next successor. And as we said, since it's a successor, it doesn't have a left child, which means that we just detach the right subtree and the left subtree of Z. Okay. This is the L part and the R part. The L part is the new left child of Y. And the R part is the new right child of Y. And the old right child of Y will be the new left child of where Y was sitting before. So the right subtree of Y is taking the place of Y. Okay. So we cut out Y. We remember the right subtree of Y and put it where Y was. Then we lift Y up to where Z was and attach the right child of Z to Y and the left child of Z also to Y. Okay. So this is how delete works in the most complicated situation. So we have to sever the trees in two different positions. So we remove the Z and we remove the Y. When we remove the Y, we put the right child of Y to where Y was. We take Y out, put it where Z was, and put the old right child of Z to Y and the old left child of Z to Y. Okay. So this is the most complicated point. And here is the algorithm. Yeah. So the algorithm uses the transplant sub-operation, which is basically the operation that replaces the subtree that is at node U with the subtree that is at V currently. So it removes the tree from a pot and puts it in another pot. So this is just a wiring operation. This is simple. You just do, you just check whether you are the root. And if you're the root, you have to remember what the root is. This is something which is usually forgotten. If people write down their algorithms, the fringe cases are usually lost. So you have to remember that if you transplant the tree such as the new root, that you have to remember that it's the new root. And then you just wire the new left and right pointers properly, which is something which is better drawn, right? So you take the subtree and put it somewhere else. The only thing you have to remember is where the parents point and where the child pointers of the parents go. So this is the simple transplant operation. And here you have to delete. So the delete, as we explained, is you first check whether the left child is nil. If the left child is nil, you transplant the right child to the point where Z was before. If the right child is nil, you transplant the left subtree of Z to where Z was before. And then we have the complicated thing. And the complicated thing is we look for the successor. So we look for the minimum of the right subtree. So remember, it's a simpler successor operation than before because we already know that Z has a right child. And so the successor has to live in the right subtree. So we don't have to do the traverse up part of the successor search. We only have to find the minimum of the right subtree. And once we've found the minimum of the right subtree, we need to figure out whether the node is way down the tree or whether it's the next node down the tree. So meaning in the picture, whether we were at C or at D. C says that the successor is just the next child. And D is that we're further down the tree. So this is what this operation distinguishes. It checks whether Y is actually the successor, whether Y is actually the right child of the node we're sitting at. And if it's true, our method is simple. We only have to transplant these things. And otherwise, we have to do the whole operation. So we can skip the middle transplant part if we're further down the tree. So otherwise, we only have to put Y to the position where Z was and have to rewire the left subtree. So this is what we always have to do. We always have to wire the left subtree of Z to be the left subtree of Y. And of course, we have to remember that the parent of the new left subtree is not Y. But if we are further down the tree, we have two things to do. We also have to replace the right subtree of Y to put it where Y was, which is what we do first. So if we are further down the tree, we have to put the right subtree of Y to where Y was. And then we have to put the left subtree of Z to be the left subtree of Y. So let's look at the picture once again. So if we are further down the tree, we have to put the right subtree of Y, which is this here, to where Y was, which is this operation. And then we have to put Y to where Z was and transplant the left subtree of Z to be the new left subtree of Y. Okay? Everything clear? I can repeat it once more. So this is the simple operation. Okay? The simple operation says that whenever Z and Y is the next element, the successor, we transplant, we put Y to where Z was, and then transplant the left subtree of Z to be the new left subtree of Y. Okay? And this is now the more complicated operation. And the more complicated operation takes two steps. It first transplants the right subtree of Y to where Y was, which is doing this operation. So it's replacing Y by its right subtree. And then it's taking the Y and putting its left and putting the left child of Z to be the new left child of Y and putting the Y to where Z was. Okay? And this is exactly what this operation is doing. So the second operation is the same. So we put the left subtree of Z to be the new left subtree of Y and replacing Z by Y. So this is done no matter whether we are in Z or whether we are in D. In D, we have this intermediate operation that transplants the right subtree of Y to be the new child of where Y was. Okay? So this is the additional operation in the more complicated case. Okay? So this is how we delete from a subtree. Okay? So how much effort are insert and delete? We've already seen that insert is a theta of one operation. This is something we write down again. So theorem 12.3. Okay? Okay? So we insert and delete have a runtime of theta of H. H. Where H is the height. Of the search tree. So why? Well, again, for insert, we already did the argument. Because insert looks at the point where we insert the new element and it traverses the tree down level by level until we find the leaf. So we have to do at most order of H comparisons. And then the insert operation just means we have to rewire to three pointers or two pointers, which is an order of one operation or theta of one operation. Now, for delete, we have to do the same. So we have to find the position of where we are, which is basically something where we point at. So this is a theta of one operation. And then we have to find the successor. And the successor means we have to find this minimum of the right search tree. And we already know that this runs in theta of H time because it's a minimum operation. And then again, depending on what we are doing, we either have to call a single transplant operation or we have to call two transplant operations. But both of them work in theta of one because they don't involve any loop. They only involve rewiring of a few pointers and a few comparisons. So therefore, all of the operations that we've now learned run in theta of the height of the tree. And as I've iterated it 70 million times now, that means that we have to make sure that the height of the tree is as small as possible for our elements. Well, we will see in our trees, we will not do it as small as possible. There are trees where the height is guaranteed to be as small as possible. But the trees that we are now learning are trees where the height is not as small as possible, but they are fast to maintain. And those are the ones that are usually used also in most of the algorithms. So if you look at, for example, the C++ implementation of the standard library, which does have binary search trees to use, and they are used for doing set operations and map operations and things like that, they implement exactly the algorithms that we are discussing now. And many of the other programming languages that use maps and things like that use the same method. And the method is red-black trees, which is chapter 13. And we'll discuss red-black trees next. Are there any questions left about chapter 12? Who didn't get it? Who wants to have some additional information before we start doing the next thing? Nobody, I thought so. So the next thing is red-black trees. Red-black trees work by adding an additional property to every node of the tree, a color. That's why they call red-black trees. I have no idea who I had the idea to use red-black, you know, white-black or white-green. I have no idea. You need two colors. And usually they call red-black. And the important thing about red-black trees is that every node is red or black, which is nice. Great. So that's the first property of a red-black tree. And again, I forgot. Okay, so I have to do something for the people who are actually looking for the recording of the lecture course. Because apparently I forgot again to transfer here and back between the projections. So just for all the people who are watching and seeing that in the recording, I didn't properly display the pictures. You could come to the lecture course. Then things won't happen. So things are bad. It's not my intention. But it happens. Because chucking all these things, lights and projections, is a bit annoying. So this was the picture of C and D in deletion of nodes. And this was the algorithm for transplanting a tree to another point. And so I'll wait for 10. You can stop the video and look at it. This is nice about videos. And this is the delete operation on trees, which I explained on the top. We have the two simple cases. Then we have D in the IF and the other thing in the NOT IF. So look at it. Stop it and study it. And I'm going now to red-black trees. Okay. So I'm going back to my... Okay. So the next thing is red-black trees. So I will write down the properties of red-black trees here. So the first important property of a red-black tree is every node in the tree is either red or black. Properties. One. Every node is either red or black. This is property one. So there are no nodes with no colors. Second thing is the root is black. Yeah. Always. That. Leaves. Leaves are nil. So, leaves point to nil, right? So, this is what we have, the pointers. The children of leaves are nil. And nil is black. So, nil is always black. So, this is the third. An important thing is four. And four says that if a note is red, then both of its children are black. Which means you cannot have two reds in succession. Right? So, red notes have only black children. This is four. And the fifth one is, whenever we have a note and we go down a path until we hit a leaf, then all the paths going down from every note contains the same number of black notes. So, every path that goes down from a note to a leaf contains the same number of black notes. So, every path, every simple path, every simple path, every simple path from any note, note, going down to a nil, note, going down to a nil, contains the same number of black notes. And this is the balancing thing. So, the fifth property of a red, black tree makes sure that all the operations are somewhat balanced. Right? Because we cannot have an arbitrary, and four, four and five together. We cannot have an arbitrary number of reds. So, if we have two different paths going down, they can only differ by the number of reds. Right? Because the number of blacks on the path has to be the same. So, the two paths can only differ by the number of reds that we hit in between. And there cannot be any, there can never be two reds in succession. And that means we always end with a black because nils are black. And so, we can have at most double the number of nodes in one path than in any other one. Going down, right? Actually, one less because we only have, we can only add intermediate reds. So, if we have one path that has three blacks, the other one can have only one and two additional reds. Right? Because there can be only one red between two blacks. There can never be more than one red because two reds in succession are forbidden by four. And so, that means that the tree is more or less balanced. It is not perfectly balanced, but it's somewhat balanced. Right? Because the paths going down can differ by at most a factor of two. Okay. Now, so, that means we have an additional property for every node, which can be encoded by Boolean if you want to. This is just a binary decision. So, it only needs one bit, whether it's red or black, which is the red bit, right? So, this is not very memory intensive to store the color of a node in the red-black tree. What we do usually do is we add a sentinel. So, remember what sentinels were? Sentinels were, for example, in lists. We added the sentinel element, which was basically a list node that pointed to the beginning and to the end, which made the double linked list in a circle, which encoded the start and the end. The same is done with red-black trees. They add a nil sentinel, which represents all the nils and the parent of the root node. Right? which is usually called t.nil. So, for implementing red-black trees, implementing rb trees, trees, we add a nil sentinel. t.nil, which has, of course, children, it has parents, and it has other things. the nil sentinel is always black, but we can change its other attributes. We can change its p, its left, its right, and the key in order to organize the operations on the tree. So, that's the nil sentinel. So, the nil sentinel represents all the nils that we have. And we can change. So, it's important. During algorithms, during algorithms, t.nil t.nil is always black. t.nil is always black, and we can change its .left .right .parent .parent .key . So, whenever we want to change something, we change something. So, we will not rely on specific values of the nil sentinel, but we will use it within an algorithm. So, this is a simplification. It's important to understand this is a simplification. This, if we use the sentinel, and if we change the elements of the sentinel, this does make the red-black tree implementation not re-entrant. Okay. So, now I have to talk about what re-entrance means. If we implement algorithms for a library or for a computer, nowadays, because many operations can run concurrently on a computer, what computer operations, nowadays, are usually organized in processes, right? Many processes run at the same time, and processes can have several threads that run in parallel. Nowadays, you know that most of the CPUs have more than one core, more than one CPU core. So, usually, if you buy a new laptop or a new computer, they always advertise, well, you have a 16-core CPU or an 8-core CPU or 4-core CPU. So, they can perform calculations at the same time, which modern software usually uses, right? So, if you want to speed up things, you can do stuff that works independently of one another in parallel on a computer. If you perform operations in parallel, like performing operations on search or operations on insert or operations on data structures in parallel, what you don't know is how many of the threads access your data structure at the same time. So, running concurrently, right? And you don't know when this concurrent operation actually will happen. So, if you have several things that run at the same time, your data structure will be accessed from many threads at the same time. And you don't know which happens first. So, if you want to make your algorithms and your data structures thread safe, it's called thread safe. You have to make sure that all the operations that work, that can work concurrently, actually are not hampered by, cannot be interrupted or cannot be destroyed by another thread doing the same operation at the same time. So, this requires new thinking. And one of the first elements is if you don't think even about threads, but only about operations, right? Then what you have to make sure is that about processes and about shared libraries, if you want to implement all the things only once, then what you have to make sure is that all the data you have is local to the process only, right? So, you have to make sure that all your data at the same time is not being changed by another process. So, you cannot do things like static data structures, like things that belong to the algorithm and not belong to the process. This is complicated, right? You don't... Okay. So, how shall I explain that? If you have... If you have... If you have... If you have... Operations on a computer, you have this large blob of memory that we've been talking about, right? And we've been talking about several organizations of that memory. So, when I talked about the hash tables and the heap, the implementation of the heap, the data structure of the heap, I also talked about the organization of a heap as data. And I said to you that you have the stack and you have the registers in the CPU and things like that. Okay. Okay. Now, if you're in a modern operating system, if you have... You can have processes and every process can have more than one thread. A process is something that is completely separate from something else. A process has its own complete memory slice. So, whenever you have a modern operating system, it takes this large blob of computer memory and cuts out the slice that is for your process only. No other process may access this slice of the blob, right? And you can organize that slice of data as you wish, right? And you can ask the operating system for more of that blob and that operating system will give you, will extend your blob. And in between your view of the stuff and the view of the operating system and the large blob is something that's called a memory management unit. The memory management unit will tell you you have a contiguous blob of memory that is that size but in reality it will make sure that the data which is in that small part of the blob will sit somewhere there. The data that is in that small sub of the block will sit somewhere there. But you will never see that because this is a CPU type thing on its own that maps your view of the blob to real elements in the data structure. Okay, so and this is organized in pages. You get a new page this is sitting somewhere but you see it as one contiguous blob. And every process has its own blob and the operating system and the CPU make sure that you don't interfere with each other. This is the first thing. So this is processes. In order to make sure that you do not gobble up all of the memory. for example you want to do specific operations like organizing search trees and some other process also wants to organize search trees. Right? Then the organization of such a search tree is usually done in a library. So you so like in Python or in other so in Julia you have a library that you import and that library can do all of the things for you. Now we know that our operating system organizes processes in distinct chunks of data. and this is not only true for the data you access but also for the programs you access. Right? So the program code is also organized in Blob. So you have your view to the program code somebody else has a view to the program code but program codes usually don't change. So the program code is the same. Organizing a search tree works the same way in this process as it works in this process. And so it would be a waste of memory to put a copy of the algorithm into the first process put a copy of the algorithm into the second process put a copy of the algorithm in the third process which means that we can use all the same code exactly the same and this is called a shared library that means that this process this process and this process also all use the same algorithm code for organizing a search tree okay and if you're doing windows these things are called dll's right you've seen if you installed windows programs on a computer it's always a mess with dll's and they will always copy some dll's so I know I'm almost finished but this is something I want to finish just saying okay so this is the shared libraries and the shared libraries organize their own memory because they have to do the same operation several times and if you organize something like such an algorithm you have to make sure that inside doesn't use a fixed memory structure right because then what could happen is that when this process calls you and this process calls you they do different things with your internal memory structure but you don't know when these things call and so you have to make sure that you separate memory structures that can change for the processes and this is what we call a library to be reentrant so if one process uses it and another process uses it they don't interfere with each other even if despite being the same code that is actually running right we don't copy the library therefore we as writers of the library have to make sure that even if 10 different processes use us right we don't we make sure that they can't interfere with each other because they actually do and such a sentinel is a good way of losing that property because if we have only one sentinel for our data structure and during our algorithms we manipulate it what can happen is that the process scheduler interrupts us and transfers calculation to the next process which uses the same sentinel but thinks it is his sentinel but it was our sentinel and suddenly nothing works anymore because we don't know when we are interrupted and we okay so this is what I wanted to take is this now somehow understandable what I said somehow okay we will discuss these things several times so I wish a nice afternoon see you again tomorrow bye bye
