Okay, hi. So welcome back to the lecture course. Well, no, that's better to go up. Yesterday, we started to discuss a bit of probability just enough that we can do the next section in the book, which is chapter five, which is on randomest algorithms. And we will do things quite short. So yesterday, we defined what a measure is, we defined what a sigma algebra is, we defined what a basically probability measure is. It's something that assigns to every subset a number. And since it has to be non-negative, and these numbers have to add up, the numbers all have to be between zero and one. And we also know that measure the probability of the whole set has to be equal to one. So this was one of the axioms that we had for probability measures. And we saw that if the set of basic events is finite, then we can assign to every single event a number that should be between zero and one. And the numbers all will have to add up to one, so that we can get a probability measure at the end on the finite set. And what else did we do? We also said that on the real numbers, if we want to have the measure to be translation invariant, and if we want to have that it is actually measure, and that all the intervals have length, have measured their length, then we cannot measure every set. So this is also something we saw yesterday. So we have to assign a measure to some of the sets. And the intervals are the most important ones. And of course, what we know is that if we have unions of intervals, there can be at most countably many intervals that are disjoint in the real numbers, because every interval has to contain a rational number. And so there are only countably many rational numbers. So it can be at most countably many disjoint intervals. So we can then easily calculate the size of the whole thing by just summing up all the length of the intervals. And this can, of course, be infinity. So this is not the probability measure on R. So the question is, now that we have this measure on R, how can we get different things like probability measures? And there are several possibilities, but the most important ones that we will use, so there are others, and you will learn the others in the class next semester. But the ones that are important for us are the continuous probability measures. Actually, if you want to remember the term for next semester, it's the ones that are absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure. So how do they produce measures? Well, they do produce it by integrals, right? So we fix a function f from R to R. So f has to be non-negative, so f of x is greater or equal to 0 for all x in R. And what else do we want? We want that the integral over all of R of f of x dx is equal to 1. So we want to have that the integral is 1. And now how can we get the probability measure on subsets of R? So on the Lebesgue algebra we can get a probability measure now by if A is in the Lebesgue sigma algebra. So i.e. A is a subset of R and measurable. So not the set V of last time. We cannot do that for the set V, but we can do it for all the others. And especially we can do it for all of the intervals. So whenever we have an interval and we have what is the measure we can define the probability of R, the probability of A, to be the integral over A of our function f of x dx. So we don't just integrate the function over all of R, but we integrate the function only over the part of R that is interesting for us. And of course since A is a subset of R, this of course means that this has to be smaller or equal to 1. And since the function f is greater or equal to 0, we know that the integral has to be greater or equal to 0, so this number has to be greater or equal to 0 as well. So it is a probability, it's something between 0 and 1. And of course by the properties of the integral, it also satisfies the other things. So that if we have two disjoint sets and we integrate over both of them, that's the sum of the two integrals, right? So this is how we get continuous probability distribution. So what are our typical examples of our f of x? So examples. One example is f of x is 1 over b minus a. If a is smaller or equal to x is smaller or equal to b and 0 otherwise. Well this of course, if b is bigger than a, otherwise it doesn't make sense. So if b is bigger than a, then this of course, if you integrate it over all of R, then the integral is 1. Because it's only non-zero in the interval a-b. The length of a-b is b minus a, so b minus a cancels out. So this is the uniform distribution on the interval a-b. And it doesn't matter whether the ends are included or not. So the distribution is always the same. So these are probably the ones you know. So now we can get other ones, which are probably also quite famous. So another example would be f of x is equal to. Well, so what we can have is e to the minus lambda times x for x greater or equal to 0. And we're not yet finished. I just tell you how to get the probability distribution. And for x smaller than 0. So there should be a constant in front of that in order to understand which constant we need to get. We need to integrate this function, right? So if you want to integrate that function, how do we get? We get a 1 over lambda if we integrate the function. So if we integrate this from 0 to infinity, the integral will be 1 over lambda. So in order to get it to 1, we have to add a lambda over there, right? So let's calculate the integral. So what is the integral over r? So from minus infinity to plus infinity of f of x dx. This is, of course, the same as the integral from 0 to infinity of lambda e to the minus lambda dx. And lambda, of course, is positive. Okay, so what's that? Well, this is 1 over lambda. This is lambda times 1 over lambda minus e to the minus lambda x. We have to evaluate this between 0 and infinity. So upper bound is infinity, where this goes to 0. So this is 0 minus. And then we have to evaluate this at 1, which is minus lambda times 1 over lambda is 1 times 1 is 1. So minus minus 1 is 1. So indeed, this integral is 1. So this is a proper function. These functions f, by the way, are called density functions. That's something I forgot. And this is the so-called exponential distribution. Okay, great. So what is also something that you'll likely need later is the last example. f of x is equal to e to the minus x squared. And actually, this is the distribution Gauss would use. So usually, we will add a few terms. We will add a minus mu here. And we divide this by sigma. Then we square it. And we take a half. And then we have to make sure that the integral at the end is 1, which is we have to add a 1 over sigma square root of 2 pi there. So this is for x in R. And you will prove next year that the integral of this function is actually 1. And so mu is a real number. And sigma has to be bigger than 0. So this is the mu sigma normal distribution. This is the density of the normal distribution. So those are the important ones. And we will need some of them perhaps later. But this is just as an example. So as I told you, proofs will be mostly next semester in the lecture course. Okay, so those are the important things. Now we have to define a few important terms when we talk about probability distributions. And the first thing is conditional probability and independence. Okay, so now we start with some set omega and some sigma algebra on it and some probability. Okay, so that's what we defined yesterday. This is called a probability space. This is also something I said yesterday. So we fix our basic event set, which is omega. Then we fix our events that we can actually measure. Those are the ones that are in sigma. And then the probability measure tells us what's the probability of each possible event. And we've defined the properties of that yesterday. Now, the question is, what can we say about these things? So we already know that if we have two disjoint events, A and B, then the probabilities add up. Now, the next interesting question is, what happens if we take the intersection, so the end connection, end between the two events. So if A and B happen at the same time. So the interesting question is, how does the probability of A intersection with B, how does this probability relate to the probabilities of A and of B? Right? So what is true in general is there is no reason why this should be the product of the two probabilities. So this is what you would somehow expect, right? So if you have two dice, right? And you throw both of them. Then the probability that you get two sixes at the same time is the probability that the first die is a six. And the second one is also a six, which is one six times one six is one 30, one over 36. And this is true, actually, if you try it, this is true. But this is only true because these are two dice you throw somewhat more or less independently. If you connect them by some string, this will no longer be true. So this is in general not true. If this is true, the two events are called independent. So if the probability of A intersection with B is the same. If A and B are called independent. So if you have two independent events, then the probabilities multiply. If you want to have the same both at the same time. Otherwise, you can form if the probability of B is not zero. So if the probability of B is not zero, then we can define the conditional probability. The probability of A given B is the probability of A given B. The probability of B is defined as the probability of A and B divided by the probability of B. That says the probability that event A happens if you already know that the event B happens. Right? So you already know that B is true. That B will happen. Now the question is, if you already know that, what is the probability that also A happens? Right? And this is defined as the probability of both of them happening. Measured with respect to the probability that B itself happens. If A and B are independent. Independent. Independent. Then this implies that the probability of A given B is the same as the probability of A. If they are independent, knowing that B will happen doesn't help you in knowing anything about A. Because then A will have the same probability as before. Right? So this is why many of the things about if you play lottery, if you play in the lottery, right? And you have to guess numbers for winning. Then even knowing that, I don't know, the number 17 has not appeared for the last 175 drawings of the lottery, doesn't help you at all concluding that the number 17 will come up in the next lottery. Because lottery drawings are independent. So even if you know any of these things, this doesn't help you a lot. Because it could have could mean that by statistics, all the lottery balls are equivalent and for some chance it didn't happen. But it could also be that, I don't know, the 17 lottery ball is a big, is a bit bigger and never falls into this strange holes or something like that. The two stick that the balls. And so you can't know whether it's it's more likely or less likely, whatever. So the point is, which is interesting because that also tells us that I don't know when you're playing lottery at home and you are, I don't know, in Austria, it's six in 45, I guess. Right? And if you think about it, the tip that you give in the lottery is equally likely that one, two, three, four, five, six is coming up. And nobody would ever, ever think to give this tip. Right? I've never, ever seen anybody play the first N numbers in a lottery if they are allowed to choose them. But the likelihood that they're gonna come up is the same as the ones that you tip. Okay. Anyway. Now. So this is, this is the conditional probability. And if they're independent, I've already said that. Of course, we can tell, we can talk about many events. And if you talk about many events, then there is two possible notions. The first one is many events, many events can be pairwise independent. So if we have, if a, i are all in sigma and i equals one to n, we call them pairwise independent. So if a, i and a, j are independent whenever i is not equal to j. Of course, an event cannot be independent to itself. So if this, this is one notion. The other notion is, we can say the AI are mutually independent. independent. If the probability that all of them happen at the same time is the same as the product of all of the probabilities. And important, these two are not the same. And actually what you really want to have is that it is, no, that's not what I, that's not true. Wait, wait, no. I'm too fast. at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the same at the So those two are not the same. This one is a stronger property than this one. So why is this the case? You can see it very easily. So just imagine that you have two coins. If you flip the coins, the first event shall be that the first coin is heads. The second event is that the second coin is heads. And the third event is that both coins end up to be different. So we have two coins, C1 and C2. So the first event, A1, is C1 is heads. The second event is C2 is heads. And the third event is C1 is not equal to C2. Okay, so how would we encode that in our omega? Okay, what is omega? Well, omega is pairs. The first one is what is C1, which is the possibility to be head and head. Then we have, sorry, it's a set. Then we have head and tails. Then we have tails and head. And then we have tails and tails, right? So those are the four possible events. And since we have two independent coins, and fair coins, the chance that the first is coming up heads is a half, that the second coming up heads is a half. So all of these events have probability one over four, right? So all the probabilities are one over four. Now, let's think about the first event. So if A1 is a subset of omega, so what is A1? The first has to be heads. So A1 is head, head. And head, tail, right? So this is A1. What is A2? A2 is that the second coin has to be heads. So this is head, head. And this is tail head. Right? What is A3? A3 is that both of them are different. So this is apparently head, tails and tails, head. Right? So those are the three events. Now, let's check whether they are pairwise independent. Okay? So what is A1 intersection with A2? A1 intersection with A2 is obviously heads, heads. So what is A1 intersection with A3? Well, this is heads, tails, tails. And what is A1, A2 intersection with A3? Well, this is tails, heads, heads, tails. So what are the probabilities? Well, the probability of them, this is one half, this is one half, this is one half, right? Because it's a quarter plus a quarter in every case. And the probabilities of all of this is a quarter because it's only one element in there. So now, let's talk about probability of A1 intersection with A2. This is a quarter, which is one half times one half, which is the probability of A1 times the probability of A2, which means that A1 and A2 are independent, right? Well, the same is true for A1 and A3, because this is also a quarter, which is also a product of one half and one half, which is also the probability of A1 times the probability of A3. So they are independent as well. And the final is A2 intersection with A3, which is also a quarter, which is also the product of a half and a half, which is the probability of A2 and times the probability of A3. So, therefore, we can see that all the pairs satisfy the equation, so they are indeed pairwise independent. But they are not mutually independent. Why not? Because if they were mutually independent, we would also have the three intersections. So let's look at what is the probability of A1 intersection with A2 intersection with A3. Well, if we take the intersection of A1 and A2, this is HH, which is not in A3. So this is the empty set. And so the probability is zero, which is clear, because if the first one has to come up heads and the second one has to come up heads, and they have to be different, this just doesn't work out, right? And this is apparently not the product of all of them, which is 1.8. So they're not mutually independent. Right? Because they would have to be equal as well. So this is a much stronger property being mutually independent. Okay, great. Great. Now, let's continue from there. Okay, great. The next important thing is Bayes' theorem. Bayes' theorem says that the probability of A given B is the same as the probability of A times the probability of B given A divided by the probability of B. And this is quite trivial from the definition. You just have to plug in the definitions of A given B and B given A, and everything else cancels. This is quite simple. There is an equivalent form of Bayes' theorem, which says that the probability of A given B. Yeah, what is also important is that the probability of A complement is 1 minus the probability of A. Which is also clear because A and A complement are disjoint. So the probability of the union has to sum up, which means that the probability of A plus the probability of A complement has to be a probability of everything. And the probability of everything is 1 by definition. So this is something simple that you also know from school. And then there is another version of Bayes' theorem, which says that the probability of A given B is the same as you take the probability of A multiplied by the probability of B given A. And then you divide it by the probability of A times the probability of B given A. A times the probability of B given A plus the probability of A complement. A times the probability of B given A complement. A times the probability of A. This is something that comes in handy in many calculations. A times the probability of B given A. So this is something that you take the probability of A. at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at at and then write it down. This is also called the law of total probability. Okay, so this is about probabilities. There is one more or two more very important notions in probability theory. And the first one is expected value. And the second one is the one of, actually, there's three expected value, variance, and what is a random variable, right? So let's go to random variables next. And actually, we will only need real valued random variables. You can define random variables between any measure spaces, but we will only need real valued. So we start with a probability space, right? So we start with a probability space. And then we consider function. So a random variable is a measurable function. And I'll tell you in a second what this means. Function f from omega to r. So when is a function called measurable? It's called measurable. So if for every subset a, subset r, that is Lebesgue measurable, that is measurable, f inverse of a in sigma. So the inverse also has to be measurable. The premitch for every measurable set has measurable. Then a function is called measurable. So that basically means that from every, yeah, that's what it means. Premitch of every measurable set is measurable. Okay. Okay. Now, this is nice because what you can do now is you can actually define what the probability is that X is in some set A. So what is the probability that F of X, that F, let me think. Okay. One more. So usually, we call the functions X, Y, and so on. So usually, denote them by capital numbers. Okay. So let X be a random variable. A, and A, a subset of R, measurable. We define the probability that X is in A as probability X is in A is defined as the probability of X of A. X inverse of A. X inverse of A. Okay. And this is why you need that property, right? Because you can only measure sets that are in sigma. You remember, you have to fix because the sigma tells you of which sets you can actually say that they have a size. Now, we take a set that has a size in R and we take its pre-image. and then we say that's the probability that our random variable at the end sits in A. So why does this make sense? Now, we remember the exam in linear algebra and we remember the linear algebra lecture course. So how is F inverse or X inverse of A actually defined? This is defined as the set of all what? Of all A in omega such that X of A is in A, right? So this is the pre-image of a map. And so therefore this makes sense because it says that the probability that X lands in A is the set of all A in omega for which X actually lands in A and the probability of that set, right? So this is why these two things make sense. This is the definition and this is why you need this property in order to connect sets in the reals and sets in your omega space. Okay. that's why it's important to know these things. Now, if we have a discrete probability, so if omega is finite, we can also ask ourselves what is the probability that X is equal to X and X is in R. What is this probability? This probability is therefore by definition the probability of X inverse of X. Well, X itself is a measurable set because it's an interval of length zero. So, all of these things are measurable. So, what is this then? Those are the set is the set of all entries in omega. So, this is the probability of the set of all omega in omega for which X of omega is equal to X, right? by this definition. X of a being in a if a is only a single point then this has to be equal. Now, we also know how to calculate probabilities of sets in a finite set. This is a sum. This is the sum of all the probabilities of these omega. So, this is the sum over all omega in omega for which X of omega is equal to X of the probability of omega, right? So, this is how we defined it. Or, we can also write this, the set of overall X of omega is equal to X of the probability of omega. This is something we will need frequently. in the discrete case. Okay. Let's go up. This comes down. And I need to clean the blackboard again. Okay. Great. So, this is a random variable. The next thing about random variables is we need to calculate their expected value. This is the next important concept. What is the expected value? is the expected What If you're missing any proofs, never mind, they will be done next semester. The probability theory class. If you don't miss the proofs, be prepared for them still. So, okay, great. Now, the next thing what we would like to do is we would like to have the expected value of a random variable. Expected value. Thank you. Okay, so the first thing we know is we have to get something like the probability density function of our random variable. So, usually what we would like to do, we would like to say that we would like to define a function f of x to be that the probability of x is equal to x. So, if we have, if x is a random variable, we would like to define that. And this is okay, perfectly okay for discrete probabilities, right? If you have discrete things, we can perfectly define that if omega is finite. And we can get this function. And this is the so-called probability density function of x. Of x. This is only true if x is discrete. So, what we do know, of course, is that f of x is greater or equal to 0 everywhere. It's clear. And, of course, what we also know is that the sum overall x of f of x is equal to 1. It has to be because it's a probability density. And what does this sum over x mean? Actually, the sum over x means that we only consider those x for which actually we can calculate a non-zero probability. Yeah? Because for most elements in R, the probability will be 0. So, we only sum up over those that are non-zero. And we've already defined how it works. Okay. So, usually, this is one possibility. The other possibility is for discrete. This works for discrete probability distributions. For continuous probability distributions or so, this doesn't work. If the omega is large, because then everything else will be 0. And we don't have the 0 function. Right? So, what we can look at is we can think about the following thing. So, what is the probability that x is smaller or equal to x? What is this probability? Well, this is, of course, the sum over all y that are smaller or equal to x of the probability that x is equal to y. Right? Well, it's simple. Okay. So, and actually, here, the x can be arbitrary, a real number. The y can't because we sum up over all the y. So, those are only the sums for all the y's that are actually hit by our discrete random variable. But for all x, this does make sense. So, let's think what is if x is equal, what is if x is arbitrary small? What happens if x is smaller than all of those y's for which we have a non-zero probability? So, we can calculate the limit of x going to minus infinity of that function. Right? Let's call this function capital F of x. So, what do we know? We know that the limit of x going to minus infinity of capital F of x is equal to zero because we don't have any things down there. Okay. Okay. So, now, let's look at what happens if we let x go to plus infinity. If x goes to plus infinity, we eventually overtake all of the y's that we have. So, at the end, every possible outcome is there. And the probability that any possible outcome is there is one. Right? So, if we go to plus infinity, we end up with one. And what else? Well, if x is bigger, this sum only gets bigger. So, the function is also monotone increasing. Right? It's only getting bigger. It's never getting smaller. So, f is monotone. Monotone increasing. Monotone increasing. And this function, f, has a name. It's called the cumulative probability distribution function. Or cdf. Or cdf. Now, this function can be defined for arbitrary random variables. Why? Now, let's redefine the function. So, what is the probability of x being small or equal to x? Well, this is, of course, the probability of x being in the interval minus infinity to x. It's the same. Saying that something is small or equal to x is the same as saying that's in the interval minus infinity to x. Right? So, this is the same. But this is an interval. And since it's an interval, it's measurable. And for measurable functions, we've already defined what the probability is. Right? So, this function, f of x, can be defined for all random variables, not just for discrete ones. Okay. Now, the interesting question now, if capital F of x is differentiable. So, now let's consider the following thing. Now, let's consider the question. What happens for the probability being in the interval? So, being a smaller than x, smaller equal to b. What would this be? Well, apparently, you can write this as union like this. So, this is the probability of x being in the interval b, a, right? This is the same. And what we know is that b, a, union minus infinity to b is the same as minus infinity to a, right? It's just if you add to minus infinity to b, all the elements between b and a, you get everything between minus infinity and a. And these two are disjoint. And since they are disjoint, we know that the probability of x being in b, a, plus the probability of x being in minus infinity, b, b, is the same as the probability of x being in minus infinity, a. But we know what this probability is. This is f of a. And we know what this probability is. This is f of b. And so, this, of course, means that this is f of b minus f of a. Right? Right? And so, what we can do now is this somehow sounds familiar. So, you evaluate the function on the upper bound of something and you evaluate the function on the lower bound of something. So, if this function is differentiable, then what you can use is the main theorem of calculus, right? Which tells you that f of b minus f of a is the integral from a to b of f prime of x dx. And so, if f is differentiable, we call its derivative the probability density function of the random variable x. So, if f is differentiable, we call f prime of x, the probability density function of x. And actually, we do not need that it is differentiable everywhere. We only need that this is true. And this is true in more cases. Right? So, you can do it in more cases. And the nice thing about probability theory, and this is something you will learn next year, is that you can always define a kind of integral that makes this more or less always true. But you have to get a different notion of integral and a different notion of function. And I don't know whether you do this next year or not, but you can make this always sensible in some sense. But for us, it's only important that if it's differentiable, because we only manage, we only will use differentiable functions. We will only have things like normal distribution or exponential distribution or other things where we really have functions that are smooth, that can be integrated and things like that. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, now we're back to how to get probabilities, how to get the probability, the cumulative probability distribution. Okay. Now, let's get to the expected value. Well, what is the expected value? The expected value, you just take the value of the function and multiply it by the probability that the function takes this value and then sum up all these things. So, the idea, of course, is if you take a dice, you throw a dice, and you get 100 euros whenever you roll a six, and you have to pay 20 for every roll of the dice. The interesting question is what do you come up with in the end if you roll the dice often enough and all the rolls are independent, right? So, whenever you get a one to five, you spend 20 euros. Whenever you get a six, you gain 80 or maybe 100 because you get also your money back and then on top 100. So, you get 100 with a probability of 1 over 6, and you have to pay 20 with a probability of 5 over 6. All right. So, the interesting question, what is this at the end? Is it good for you or bad for you? Why? Why? Why? Why? Yeah. But for five outcomes, you pay 20, and for the sixth, you get 100. No, no, I said you get back the money and then you get... Yeah. Yeah. If you count it like this, yes. But I said you get your 20 back and then you get 100. No, actually, it's a fair game. It's a fair game. You get exactly what you get back. So, at the end, it's a fair game. But this is not for the lottery, for example. Because for the lottery, you usually have on average, I don't know, in Austria, at least, I think you have to spend a euro. At least the last time I played. The chance is one to eight million or so. And you never get eight million. So, this is very unlikely, unless you have, I don't know, a seven times jackpot or so. And you have a chance to win eight million, and then the game suddenly becomes fair. But before that, it usually is very unfair towards the lotto. I think the fairest game in Las Vegas is playing blackjack, if you're optimal, because then it's only half a percent for the bank or so. If you don't cheat. Don't count cards. Okay, anyway. So, this is basically the expected value. So, we've already seen how to calculate the expected value if our probability distribution is discrete. Because then we say that the expected value of x is the sum overall small x of x times the probability that x is equal to x, right? So, this is the expected value if we have a discrete, a finite set omega. If omega is not finite, we can also, and we have a density, then we have the expected value of x as the integral over all r of x times f prime of x dx, which is the density. You multiply the density by x, and then you integrate the integral over all r, then you have the expected value of a continuous probability distribution. Or a continuous, and a continuous random variable. Okay, so this is an important thing, is the expected value. And a very important property of the expected value is that it is linear. So, let's see. I'll get this one down. I'll get this one down. Okay. Psst. Let's clean. at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the bottom at the Okay, so important, the expected value is linear. What does this mean? It means if you have two random variables, x and y, and you have an alpha, that means that e to the alpha times x to e to the beta times y is always alpha times the expected value of x plus beta times the expected value of y. This is always true. This is an important property of the expected value. The other thing is whenever x is a random variable, and g is a function from r to r. And for us, we will just assume that g is a continuous function. It also works for discontinuous functions, but we will just use continuous function most of the time. Actually, what we need is the function g being measurable. So let's write measurable. And what, for example, continuous functions are. And of course, measurable function just means to take a measurable set, take its pre-match, it has to be measurable again. So this is something we've defined already. Then, g of x is a random variable. And actually, g of x has to be a map and usually you don't write maps like this. So what is g of x? It's the random variable g. If you compose the two functions, right? You first use x and then you use g. And this is an abbreviation. We just call it g of x. And now, of course, we can also define the expected value of g of x. And the expected value of g of x is, again, the integral over r. If you write g of x times f prime of x dx, or you write the sum over all x, g of x times the probability that x is equal to x. So, the random variables are called independent. Two random variables are called independent. If the probability of x being x and y being y is the same as the probability of x being x times the probability of y being y. And you can have the same things for random variables. I don't know whether you've already learned about differentiation in multi-dimensions or things like that. Or the theorem of Fubini in integrals. No. Never mind. We just skip this and we'll only use independence for basically discrete random variables. And for discrete ones, we can just write it like this. And for the more general ones, you learn it next semester because then you will have learned all the integral stuff by then. But what is important? If x and y are independent, then the product of x and y and its expected value is the product of the expected value of x and the expected value of y. And the generalization is for mutually independent, right? You can say mutually independent random variables. You have n of them. All of them have all of these products and then the products of the expected values also is a product. There's one more thing. If x of omega is a subset of the natural numbers. So if you have only natural numbers. So all the values are natural numbers. Like if we count things, which is very frequent in algorithm theory. So if we count things, then the expected value of x is the sum overall i equals 0 to infinity of the probability that x is greater or equal to i. So there's one more thing. So if we count things, then a function f or g from r to r is called convex. If, and this is an important notion. Probably you haven't learned it in analysis by now, but you probably will. If g of lambda x plus 1 minus lambda times y is smaller or equal lambda times g of x plus 1 minus lambda times g of y. And what is important, the lambdas have to be between 0 and 1 for all x and y in r. And lambda between 0 and 1. So if this is the case, then the function is called convex. And you likely have learned convex function at school. And you probably learned there that those are the functions whose second derivative is non-negative. And if a function is twice differentiable, then it is convex if and only if its second derivative is non-negative. Right? So this is a general, a more general case of being convex. And it's very simple. So if you draw the function, you take an arbitrary point and you draw tangents below the function. Then the tangents everywhere stay below the function. You cannot, if you draw tangents to the function, they never cross the function. So the function always goes up in some bowl-like shape. It can be flat between, but it always makes it steeper and steeper. It looks like a large bowl. So if this is the case, then we have Jensen's inequality. So if G is convex, then Jensen's inequality holds. And Jensen's inequality says that the expected value of G of X will always be greater or equal G of the expected value of X. This is Jensen's inequality. This is very important when you calculate expected values. Now we are almost finished. There's one more thing to define, which is the variance and the standard deviation. So what is the variance of X? This is defined as an expected value. So this is the expected value of X minus the expected value of X, which is a number. Don't forget squared. This is a function. This is a function. This is a convex function, actually. And by linearity, this is the same as the expected value of X squared minus the expected value of X squared. This is the variance of a random variable. What we do know is that the variance of a times X is the same as a squared times the variance of X. And now, and this is important, this is a big difference to the expected value. You remember, the expected value is linear, no matter how X and Y are related. This is true whether they're independent, whether dependent, whatever. This is always true. So the expected value of X plus Y is always the expected value of X plus the expected value of Y. For the variance, this is not true. This is only true if they are independent. So if X and Y are independent, then the variance of X plus Y is the same as the variance of X plus the variance of Y. And the standard deviation, that's something I just say, you can write it down. The standard deviation is just the square root of the variance. This is the square root of the variance is called the standard deviation. Okay, now let's have a few examples. And those are ones that are important. So let's see, let's move this up. Let's clean the blackboard. Now, what is what we need in algorithm theory a bit is so very simple connections between experiments and the probabilities. So what happens very often is you try something and you try it repeatedly. But all of these things are independent. And what you get at the end is always the same probability that an event happens. So like if you throw dice, right? So if you have a dice throwing experiment and you throw the dice a hundred times, the probabilities, if you always take the same dice, will be the same no matter what happens, right? So if you repeat the same experiment with the same probabilities again and again, you have something that's called a Bernoulli trial, especially if you have only two outcomes. Okay, so Bernoulli trial trial is an experiment with omega equals two success and fail, right? So you have only two possibilities and the probability for success is P. And the probability or the probability of S is P. And the probability of F is one minus P. So only have two, these two things is called a Bernoulli trial. And now just like you throw a dice and you get one six, if you get a six and the rest is five over six, if you don't hit a six. And now what we do is we take a sequence of these Bernoulli trials. So we take N of these or just we take a sequence, consider a sequence of Bernoulli trials. Let's call them independent of independent Bernoulli trials. Now the interesting question is how many trials do we have to do before we get a success? That's an interesting question, right? We try how many trials do we have to take? So how many experiments do we have to take until we have a success? Let X be our random variable. Let X be the number of trials until success. Now you can think about your omega. And your omega is basically a large product of success, failure, success, failure, success, failure of a sequence. So all of your experiments are sequences. And the first S is the random variable. So we so and this is the nice thing about probability theory. Once you've grasped it a bit, you never write down your omega again. You only think that the omega has to look something like this. These are sequences of trials, infinite sequences of trials, right? So this is the omegas. And now let's try to calculate what the number of trials is until we succeed. It has to be at least one. So what happens if we have a success in the first? So what is the probability of X being equal to one? Well, then of course, the first experiment has to be a success. So this is P. So what is the probability that X is equal to two? Well, it's clear that the first has to be failure and the second has to be a success. So this is apparently one minus P times P. And since I don't write to, so I don't like to write so many one minus P's. I write this as Q times P and set Q to be one minus P just as an abbreviation, right? So what is the probability of X being equal to three? Well, this is of course Q squared times P because we have to have two failures. They're independent. So the probabilities add up. And so what we have is what is the probability of X being equal to K? This is Q to the K minus one times P, right? Now we can figure out whether we've got all cases. When do we have all cases? If all of them add up to one. So we need to calculate the sum over K equals one to infinity of the probability that X is equal to K. Well, this is the sum of K equals one to infinity of P times Q to the K minus one, which is equal to P times the sum of K equals one to infinity. And K minus one is K zero to infinity of Q to the K, which apparently is equal to P times one over one minus Q, because this is a geometric series. But one minus Q is one minus one minus P, which is P, which is P over P. So this is equal to one and we are. Well, this distribution, by the way, so the distribution that we have here is called the geometric distribution with parameter P. So this, the distribution of X, of X is called the geometric distribution with parameter P. So now the interesting question is what is the expected value of that? So what is E of X? So what do we need to calculate? We need to calculate the sum over K equals one to infinity of K times the probability that X is equal to K, which is the same as the sum K equals one to infinity of K times Q to the K minus one times P, right? So this obviously is something that depends on Q. So, and what you can see here is that this we can factor out the P. So this is equal to P times the sum K equals zero to infinity. But by shifting these things a bit and we have K plus one times Q to the K, right? Or no, let's keep it at one. Or no, let's keep it at one. It makes it easier. K times Q to the K minus one. Now this depends on Q. And so what this is, this is the derivative of the sum K equals one to infinity of Q to the K. Right? Because if you differentiate Q to the K, you get K times Q to the K minus one. But we know what this sum is. Because this is apparently the derivative of one minus, one over one minus Q minus one, the derivative. And the derivative of this is one over one minus Q squared. So this is P divided by one minus Q squared. But we know what one minus Q is. This is P. And so this is P over P squared, which is one over P. So the expected value is, depends, it's the reciprocal value of P. So this is how long on average we have to wait until we get one success. I will not calculate the variance. I will just say what the variance is. This you have to differentiate twice. If you want to calculate the variance, the variance of this is Q over Q. This is Q over P squared. But the trick is the same. This is one important question about Bernoulli trials. The other important question, and this is something we will do after the Easter break, and the beginning is, if you take N Bernoulli trials, how many successes do you get on average, right? So this is the different question. This is how long do we wait for the first success. The other is the question, how many successes do we get? And this is something we'll do after the break. I wish you a nice Easter break and see you again after your holidays. And then we will continue with the algorithms.
