The lecture course. Great. So, hi. Welcome back to the lecture course. We have... Oh, I probably cleaned the blackboard first. So, by now, we have discussed many basic operations in algorithmic theory. So, just to summarize what we did during the lecture course, we learned how to analyze the running time of algorithms. We discussed randomization of algorithms, and then we discussed basic data structures that are usually implemented in every computer system, like arrays, like lists, and trees that are useful for data science and other computer activities. And then we've discussed basic algorithms. We started with sorting, because this is one of the, as we've seen also later, one of the most basic operations that are required in producing more complex algorithms. Then we've learned how to organize more complex data structures, like search trees, and heaps, and bee trees, red-black trees, graphs at the end. So, we were discussing graph algorithms that solve important problems in not only data science, but in many applied situations, like finding shortest routes, finding minimal spanning trees. And there are lots of other algorithms around that build on these basic structures. And if you're interested, you can read the remaining parts of the book. They contain a lot of other very interesting algorithmic approaches, like number theoretic approaches, like optimization. But usually in a data science class, you will have dedicated course on optimization theory. So, this is an important part of data science, data fitting, all of these things, usually based on a combination of what we learned here, so basic algorithmic theory, and also methods from linear algebra that you've learned in the linear algebra course and methods from analysis. And today, and on Tuesday, when we have the last lecture course, I will explore some part of modern data science a bit... Let me get this done. Come on. Oops. It's a bit... Okay. Great. I will explore just an overview of some of the modern data science, which is neural networks. They're not for the exam because we will do only cursory thing. And so, the exam contains stuff that we did until yesterday. So, there's approximately a week left for the other things. Now, we will talk about neural networks and transformers. a bit. Just as an introduction. Okay. So, what we're discussing first is first part. So, this is chapter... I have no idea. It's chapter A because we've numbered these things and we had a C already. So, never mind about chapter A, which is neural networks and transformers. And we start with A1, which is neural networks as trainable functions. neural networks as trainable functions. And we see this is a very data scientific problem. So, usually what we have is we have given a data set. So, given is a data set D. And this is a pair of points. So, I equals one to N. And Xi is in sum Rd and Yi is in sum R O or Rs. Let's call it Rs. And supervised learning means that you have so the basic idea is you want to learn a mapping from input data to prediction data. Right? And all of these things, the input data is drawn from a large family of possible data points and you don't know all of them. Right? So, you only know parts of them. So, you might want to predict the, I don't know, let's say you have a machine. Right? So, a machine and this machine has a few parameters that you can actually set like pressure, temperature, whatever. Right? And then you can at the end measure how well the product was produced that you get out of the machine and this quality might be several numbers. Might be a single one like quality like zero to ten but might be that it has a let's say you produce the coat for a paper or something like that. Right? And you use this paper to wrap in food. And then what you would have for this paper is that if it gets wet the food is not spoiled immediately or if it's lying around then the oxygen of the air does not spoil your food or whatever. So you need to have some barrier properties for this paper but you have to coat it with different things and all of these barrier properties might be measurements and so you can have more than one quality thing but what you can actually do is you can sample some of the paper so you can take out 20 different coatings with 20 different thicknesses and actually can do but you can't do it for all of the possible coatings and for all of the possible thicknesses and for all of the possible sequences and things like that so that means in reality you have a problem that actually has you you want to find a function f that maps rd to rs so this is so desired desired is such a function and at the beginning of course you don't know what the function can actually do or what the function should actually do or what kind of function you are actually looking for right because there can be any connection between these parameters that you have and the output that you can actually measure and what is usually even worse is that the output might really be measurements and as you know from school or from a physics class or whatever at school measurements are not always exact right so if you repeat the measurement twice there might be additional noise like production quality and things like that so this might have an additional noise component to it so it might not be exact what you measure it might be a good approximation of the real function so all of these problems are at the same time there okay so I would use this as a small n because I've just seen that my preparation uses small n and don't want to cover this around okay so so d is the input dimension or as we call it the number of input features s is the number of output features of course then this is often called a label so if you're doing data science this is often called a label of the data point or sometimes also called a target so either target or label and of course this is the input which is simple okay so what you want to do usually is you want to produce the so called model of this situation and a model of this situation usually is a set of functions f theta for which theta is in some parameter space capital theta so what you have is not all the possible functions in the world but you choose a subset of possible functions and this subset is usually depending on a parameter theta that might be also n dimensional so theta can be in r let's call it k for the moment or rp let's call it p it's better so let's call it rp p for parameter so this is a simplified version so if you're thinking about language like large language models then obviously what you put into your data problem are not d dimensional vectors but you put words in and you want to get words out and words are not obviously d dimensional vectors but and this is important and the first step of such a large language model actually transforms every word into d dimensional vector and at the end it produces out of its output again words but these are steps that we might discuss later not today not now okay so we have this set of functions so what we want to do is we say in our model well we know that it might be any function but we think the function might approximately look like that like a typical class of problems and what is a possible model a possible classical model is that we write this as a polynomial so then f theta is actually the sum k equals 0 to some capital n of theta k times x to the k right so this would be a polynomial model and then theta capital theta would be equal to r n plus 1 because that's the possible parameters that we have so this is the polynomial model right and those are the coefficients of the polynomials are then the parameters right so this is one possibility it's a classical possibility of choosing a set of functions which we want to have optimal with respect to that problem so what optimal is is something we'll ask about a bit later so as we know from analysis I guess or from linear algebra if we have n plus 1 data points and this is one dimensional then we can actually find a polynomial that perfectly fits this interpolation problem so that perfectly reproduces yi for every xi that you're plugging in if it's a one dimensional problem right so if d is equal to one and s is equal to one we can find a polynomial that actually matches all of the output exactly to the input right it interpolates the problem and now the question is is this actually desirable right so this is an interesting question do we want that to happen and the question is we don't know right so what we actually want and this is important what we actually want is we want that the function here predicts the output well for every possible input not just for the ones that we know but it should of course predict the output best for every possible input well this is likely not possible to get a function that does this at least it's not possible for us to find it because we don't know every possible input and even continuous functions or c infinity functions if we only have finitely many information then we have infinitely many functions that actually can do that and in between two points they can change arbitrarily much so this is something that we actually cannot possibly solve and so in order to solve that properly we have to understand what actually means to find the best function right so what can it mean to find the best function and what we actually do is we the first thing what we do usually is we assign a so-called loss that depends on theta so if we have a function f theta given then we assign a loss to that function so what is the loss in reality well this when we have an arbitrary data set right so the input variable so they are this data set is coming from an application so that's not just an arbitrary data set it's an application right we want to do something like we want to produce language like we want to predict what is the best sequence of words that we can produce to answer a question for example things like that so or if we have stock courses values of stock we might want to predict what the next few values of our stocks are so that we can decide whether to invest or to sell or whatever so in order to do that we have to understand that the input data usually is not arbitrary right so the stocks don't change arbitrary they don't change in can't have negative values for example they only have positive values and things like that so and not all of the courses are actually equally likely right so there are some are more likely than others which means that all of these input variables are given some sort of probability distribution right so some of them are more probable than others the bad thing about that is that we don't know the probability distribution usually so there is some but we don't know it so let let P be the probability distribution of the data x y y i and important also the y's have a probability distribution because as I said if they're coming from measurements it doesn't automatically mean that you get the right value right you get the value plus some deviation and also the deviation you don't know you don't know the measurement error right so if you if you measure the same thing twice the y might not be the same so you also have measurement error so all of the pairs have actually a probability distribution given to them and so what is what is the possibility of defining the loss well the loss is of course something that depends on the correct prediction or not prediction so you have something some function that uses f theta and evaluates it on xi and then or on x and then measures the deviation of what the function produces with respect to the data target right so this is the loss and what you want to do is you want to minimize you want to minimize that but what do you want to minimize actually well what you want to minimize is you want to minimize the expected value of that because it's a probability distribution right so and what are the things that you can actually choose where you can choose the parameters of your function a f right you can choose the parameters of the function f and you want to minimize the expected value of that thing this is a large x and a large y and with respect to the unknown probability distribution right so we don't know the probability distribution but if we solve our problem optimally what we want to do is we want to minimize the deviation in our prediction from our targets and we want to minimize the expected value of that because that's a probabilistic thing so this is what we would like to do so we would like to find those parameters theta for which this value is minimal and x and y are of course p distributed random variables so we've talked about random variables and things like that so we should know a bit most of these things so we don't go into detail here this is something for stochastics we don't go into details but this is something we don't know right but what we can do is we can estimate the expected value of something right so how can we estimate the expected value we can draw a sample and if we draw a sample we can approximate the expected value by the mean value so therefore we define ln of theta to be 1 over n times the sum and then we have k equals 1 to n of the loss of f theta of xi and yi those are the data points that we've actually sampled which is our data set and well no let's call this ln! of theta small l so this is an approximation to this expression right so this is approximately e p of l f theta of x and y this is an approximation of that how well this approximates and things like that is known from stochastics this is something you will learn later in your lectures and doesn't matter but this is an approximation okay now what we would like to do is what happens if we minimize that with respect to theta instead of that so we minimize that and not the approximation with respect to theta so let's have ln of theta to be the minimum overall theta in theta of 1 over n sum k equals 1 to n l of f theta xi! So this is the so-called empirical loss this is the empirical loss and this is somehow we want to minimize the empirical loss if we want to minimize the empirical loss our question is how well does ln of theta approximate l of theta so how well how well does ln of theta approximate l of theta and what is important to understand is that this basically depends on data and data is sampled so if we repeat this process several times calculating this then the values will change so this is also some sort of random variable itself right and the question is well how well does this approximate this is also something you will discuss a bit later in the lecture course but what you can imagine if we think about the polynomials here and what I said before that if we have n plus one data points and a polynomial of degree n then what happens is that you can get this function down to zero because you can perfectly interpolate the data so you can get ln of theta to actually be zero but does this mean that this expected value is best for this polynomial well usually it doesn't because you don't know anything else and polynomials tend to oscillate a lot between interpolating points and so somehow what is missing is somehow the randomness in there right so you deterministically solve that problem but you do not account for the unknown randomness and so what you can actually do is you can you can draw an approximation of a map so you can go here and write ln of theta here and you can draw ln of theta here just to get an idea on how these things work well usually loss functions are non-negative so now let's see let's calculate ln! of theta and then let's calculate ln of theta I produce produce a point that lies here okay so ln of theta is very small and l of theta is very big is this a useful parameter set no why well because it's bad as we can see l of theta is large so it's not really useful right what happens if it's here is this likely it's strange right so why is it strange well because it says that we haven't been able to solve our optimization problem very well but for some reason the overall prediction quality is very good okay so this is at least strange so what happens if we're there yeah we can't even solve we haven't even been able solve the solve the solve the l n very well yeah so we should likely be somewhere there right which would be optimal and so in some reason if you could draw this picture then what it tells you is that for some reason it roughly produces four quadrants right so the first one is that ln and are both large then that means either the data is not very well predictable at all with your parameters right so it might be that your functions that you have just doesn't represent the best function well so it might be so this usually means that the model is useless or that some additional learning is required so this is usually those are usually useless models this area here means that you very very well represented your data that you sampled but the prediction quality is very bad so this is usually called overfitting overfitting means you basically interpolate the data that you sampled but for all the other data the prediction quality is bad that means that you have to do something else like not interpolate that usually means overfitting means you have too many parameters or you trained your parameters too well so this is a really useful model so this is useful something which is down there and as you said let's call it this is strange because this means that you either sampled a very bad set of points which basically means you biased you sampled biased data or you had very bad luck so that means that the data you sampled is significantly more difficult as the overall data so this is usually a sampling problem so this is strange but that means that you want to get there right and so if you are there that usually means that you have to reduce your parameter space somehow and if you are there that means you have to increase your parameter space and or choose a different method altogether the interesting question is you cannot actually draw this diagram because you don't know L of theta it would be great if you could but you can't so what we need is some sort of replacement for this capital L of theta and as we know capital L of theta is an expected value of something right and so this is still a good approximation of an expected value but what it means actually is you need to sample new data data that you haven't seen before so that you haven't used for training in order to get an estimate of what capital L of theta actually is and this is usually called splitting your data into a training set which is the one that solves for which you solve that problem and the validation set that your training algorithm has never seen before that you only use for testing whether what you actually produced is any useful right so this is some LM of theta for an independent validation set and this is usually the training set and this is why it's very important to have both so you need to if you sample data you have to make sure that you split your data by chance and not by bias into as independent sub parts as possible and you choose only part of the data for training and the rest of the data you choose for validating this as it's called map of learning so this is usually what we call the map of learning okay so this is basically the basic idea of this data science problem that you're facing and now the question is what has this to do with neural networks right and so what it has to do with neural networks is that neural networks are special models for data right so neural networks are special models for data special models okay now let's see how these special models look like well the idea of neural networks is that they represent something that resembles our own brain structure so it is a collection of artificial neurons collection of artificial neurons so what is an artificial neuron an artificial neuron is basically first a linear combination so we have z is equal to some weight vector wt that is multiplied w that is multiplied to the input variable plus a bias b so w are the weights and b is the bias so called bias so that's the first step the second step is that the neuron so this is combining the information of the other neurons or of the input by linear combination and the bias and then the activation of the neuron is done by so called activation function so you usually use a function sigma that acts on z so this is the activation and sigma is called the activation function and this is usually non-linear so the activation function is usually non-linear so what are typical activation functions let's give a small subset the most famous one is relu so sigma of z is so there are several ones but a famous one is relu of z well relu of z is just the maximum of zero and z z so that's zero and then it starts to look like z so this is the most famous one likely then the second most famous one is sigmoid of z z so wait I have to rearrange the blackboard somewhat so sigmoid of z is 1 over 1 plus e to the minus t for t or z sorry of course it's z and what is also sometimes used is the hyperbolic tangent so tangent hyperbolic tangent of z and several others so there is a whole list of modern activation functions and they introduce the nonlinear part so the basic nonlinear part in a neural network so for example if we have a single neuron one like you have a single neuron depends on two things so if we have our x which is 2 minus 1 then we have our weight vector being a half and one and our bias being for example 1 over five and our activation function being regelu so what will be the result of our neuron well z is of course w transpose times x plus b which is 1 minus 1 is 0 plus b is 1 over five and then a will be sigma of 1 over five which is already positive so this will be 1 over five so this is one possibility and of course we can have other inputs so for x equals to 1 minus 2 we have z is equal to one half minus 2 is minus 3 over 2 plus 1 fifth is minus 15 plus 2 is minus 13 over 10 right and so a will be sigma of minus 13 over 10 will be 0 so this is how this basic neuron work and of course what we can do now is we can assemble many of these neurons into one large structure and so this is what we call a layer so many neurons are assembled into a layer that basically means we have all of these inputs and they are combined to neurons all of them are combined with each other to form here the next layer of neurons and all of these are single inner products plus biases so if this is D so one of these layers has an input dimension let's call the input dimension DI minus 1 and the output dimension DI so that means we can assemble all of this into a matrix and the matrix WI is in R DI minus 1 times DI so this is a matrix and then we have the bias vector is also something we can assemble this is a vector in DI and so what we get is two steps so we have ZI that depends on the output of the layer before so the output of the layer before is something we call AI minus 1 so this is WI times AI minus 1 plus our bias vector BI and then we perform the activation so AI the output there is then sigma of ZI and this is component wise so sigma I component wise right so every single component of the vector there we have we apply our activation function to the activation functions usually are functions that map R to R so that univariate functions and they work usually component wise and this is how we stack such layers of neurons on top of each other so a multilayer feedforward neural network or what we call a multilayer perceptron stacks many of these layers on top of each other stacks several of these layers on top of each other let's say L L layers and every single of these layers looks like that so we can call this ai of zi and this is of course sigma i of zi so what happens in some of these layers is we have a recursive evaluation method so we say a0 is x that's the input variable right and d0 is d and then we iteratively define of course zi is ai of sorry of ai minus one is ai of ai minus one and ai is sigma i of zi and this is for i equals one to capital L and as a drawing what we can do is we can stack all of such things just one after the other and what are the parameters actually what are the thetas well the set of theta is just the collection of all of the matrices wi and all of the vectors bi so our parameter space theta is well the product of i equals one to L of r d i minus one times di times r di right so those are the biases and those are the matrices and all of them can be chosen as parameters so neural networks tend to have large parameter spaces the first layer so L1 L equals to one is called the input layer and the last one L is called the output layer because that's something where you actually read off the output and all the layers in between are called the hidden layers of a neural network and so this is the simplest one which is the so-called feed forward neural network or multi-layer perceptron so this is the basic structure okay so what you now want to do usually is you want to know something about the output and as we've seen here the output output usually is some sort of vector right so currently so such a multi-layer perceptron okay that wasn't fast enough can you still see it yeah okay so a multi-layer perceptron perceptron is a function f theta that maps the input vector rd to an output vector rs where s is of course dl at the moment right so that's the last dimension of the last layer however this is usually something or often something you cannot actually make use of right so if you want to predict the next word what does an s dimensional vector help usually not a lot right and so what you usually need in the output layer is you need a method to actually get information out of it and what you usually do is you want to classify something right so you want to for example predict a word or you want to predict so if you want to predict prices this might be good enough right because you can write prices as dimensional vectors but if you want to predict classes like words or like items or things like that then you need an especially important last step which is somehow the step that interprets the output properly and in order to classify things what you usually do is you produce so let c be a number of classes of classes to predict so what is for example something for if you are an insurance company right and somebody comes to you and says I want to insure my house then you have to give a price to that and usually what you have to do is you have to get an idea of how safe it is for you to insure that house in order to produce a proper price right and so insurance might be cheap if the house is somewhere in the middle of a city where all the streets are paved and nothing really bad usually happens as opposed to somewhere in the countryside on the side of a steep hill and I don't know having a lake on top of it so whatever happens flooding is not out of the idea so usually you insure such houses at a higher price or maybe it depends also on the value of the house and so you might want to you have maybe several products right so you cannot individually price every insurance so you have a set of products that you can offer and so you have to classify the risk that you have that you want to insure into several classes so this is one possibility or you want to predict words so you want to find what is the most likely word to come next so you have c classes to predict and what you usually do is you produce the so-called soft max so you produce a probability so prediction probability pk is then defined as the so-called soft max of z with respect to k and this is e to the z k divided by the sum over all classes j equals one to c e to the z j and k is in one to c so this is the so-called solve and this produces probability like distribution so we have that pk is always greater or equal to zero and the sum k equals one to c pk is equal to one and so you get probabilities and then these are so-called logits are this probably in the neural network speech they are called logits and then you usually choose the class with the highest logit so you choose the maximum of these things at the end and so then you have to take a proper loss function so the loss function for logits is usually cross entropy loss which is minus the logarithm of p one so this is usually the loss function that you use for classification okay so these are these are this is the structure of the basic structure of modern neural network so what's the time I have to check so that I don't know I have got half an hour left lots of talking left so so why are these things good well these things are good because they are large they can have very large parameter spaces and the largest neural networks nowadays that are actually used for large language models have 10 trillion or more parameters that's huge right so they can fit an elephant they can fit everything so training them is difficult and the question is how to train such a thing and actually how does this function look like so if we look closely at what f theta looks like well f theta if you look at how it's produced by this iteration over there then you can see what you actually do is you first use your linear map A1 after the linear map you use your activation sigma 1 component wise then you use the next linear map which is A2 then you use the next activation which is sigma 2 and so on and so on until the last thing which is A L and your final activation which is sigma L so in reality f theta is a composition of functions and all of these functions look very much the same they have very similar structures and so the interesting question is how can we optimize for the the the a1 depends on some of the the the the the the the the the All of them depend on all of the thetas, right? And so what we want to... But what is important is that all of these functions are at least almost everywhere differentiable, right? So those are linear functions or affine functions to be exact. And derivatives of affine functions are trivial. That's just the matrix themselves, right? So derivatives of this is simple. And these are one-dimensional functions. So calculating their derivative is also simple. Just differentiate them, right? And so calculating in principle the derivative of this function is easy because of the chain rule, right? So you just multiply the derivatives basically. And so what you can do is you can actually optimize that. But how do you optimize that? So we take the simplest idea. So just thinking back to analysis. You've learned differentiability and you've learned gradients, right? You learned what a gradient is. What is the gradient of a function? Exactly. And the biggest increase, right? And the biggest increase, right? So the gradient is the direction of the biggest increase. And so the negative gradient is the direction of the biggest decrease. And so if you want to find a minimum, one possibility is, well, let's think, where could we go? So if we're here, we might go downwards. Downwards might be a good direction. And what is the best direction downwards is the negative gradient, right? So I could go the negative gradient direction until I can't go down anymore. And then I look where I am. And when I'm down, I might look at the new gradient there because it might flow somewhere else. This is basically how water trickles down, right? So it goes usually the steepest way down. So this is not a bad direction usually. It's not the best one. We will see that later in the optimization class. So you have an optimization class, but it's a decent one, right? So let's go in the direction where the function decreases the most if we want to find the minimum. And so in order to do that, what we need to do is we need to actually calculate that gradient. Right? But we don't need to calculate that gradient. What we in reality have to do is we have to calculate the gradient of ln theta because that's the function that we want to optimize. We don't want to optimize the function f theta. We want to optimize the function ln of theta. And what is ln of theta? ln of theta is 1 over n, the sum from j equals 1 to n of l of f theta of x and y. Right? So this is j. So this is actually of what we want to compute the gradient of. Right? So what do we know about the gradient? Well, we know about the gradient is the gradient is linear. Right? It's a derivative. So since it's derivative, we can exchange it with the sum. So this is the same as sum 1 over n, j equals 1 to n, the gradient of that, l of f theta of x, j and y, j. Right? So that's the real gradient that we need to calculate. Now, if you think back on your analysis course, now is the time that we have to compute and to have to use the chain rule. So now we are reduced to computing that. And so what we see, the first thing that we see is the gradient of that function that we want to minimize is actually a sum of simpler gradients. Right? It's an average of simpler gradients to be exact. So we need to compute those simpler gradients. So how do we compute a derivative? Well, we compute the partial derivative with respect to the first entry times the derivative of the first entry plus the partial derivative with respect to the second entry times the derivative with respect to the second entry. But the second entry doesn't depend on theta. So the derivative with respect to theta of y is 0. So it's only that one. So that means that this is equal to the partial derivative of L with respect to the f. I call it f or to the x. Right? That's the x part times the gradient of f theta at x, j. But important, it's the gradient with respect to theta and not with respect to x, j. x, j is a constant. But it's the gradient with respect to f theta. So this is something we can easily calculate because we know what the loss is actually. That's a fixed function. And so what we really have to do is we have to calculate at the end. We have to calculate the gradient of that function up there. Right? Okay. So let's think about how we could do that. Now, let's think about computation. How computation works. Okay? So let's give a simple example of a function. And in order that we compute this sensible gradient, we just take a multi-dimensional function. And I take a simple one, which is not much more complicated than the ones that we have here. Let's take something like 4x1 minus x2, x3 times x1, x2 plus x3. It's a very simple function. Right? But it's a polynomial. It's a multi-dimensional polynomial. Right? So what is the compute to do? Let's calculate the gradient of that function just to make sure that we get something right. So what is the gradient of f at x1, x2, x3? Well, it's a three-dimensional vector, right? So I have to calculate it now. I don't know it by heart. So let's see. So let's differentiate by x1. This is a product. So we have 4 times x1, x2 plus 4 times x3. So we have 4x1, x2 plus 4x3, which is the first product. The second product is here is the derivative of x2. So we have 4x1, x2, which is another 4x1, x2, which is 8x1, x2 minus x2 squared times x3. So this should be the gradient of the first with respect to x1. Now let's calculate it with respect to x2. Here we have an x3, so it's x1, x2, x3 plus x3 squared. And then we have to differentiate this by x2, so we have an x1. So we have plus 4x1 squared minus x1, x2, x3. So we have minus x3. Oh, there's a minus, sorry. It's minus x3. Minus x1, x2. Yeah, it's minus 2x1, x2, x3. Okay. So, great. So this is the second one. Now let's calculate the third one. This is minus x1, x2 squared. Then we have minus x2, x3. And here differentiate by x3 is a 1. So we have plus 4x1 and one more minus x2, x3. So it's minus 2x2, x3. So this should be the gradient. Just check it at home, right? I don't completely know whether it's true. So let's see. How does a computer actually calculate that? A computer, now we know what a directed acyclic graph is already. So a computer calculates that by using a directed acyclic computation graph. So it starts with the variables x1, x2, x3. And then it uses operations. Like what is the first operation? We have to multiply x1 and x2. And we have to multiply x2 and x3. What else? We have to sum 4x1 and subtract x2, x3. So we have to get 4 times x1, a linear combination, minus 1 times x2 times x3. So that's a linear combination with coefficients 4 and minus 1. And here we have to sum up x1, x2, and x3. So this is a linear combination with coefficients 1. And then we have to calculate the product of the two, right? So which looks like this. So this is how a computer sees the expression, more or less. Okay, now let's evaluate that. I have no idea where we want to evaluate it. Let's evaluate it at non-trivial points. Let's evaluate it at 1, 3, 3. So we want to calculate the function value, f of 1, 3, 3. Now let's see what it should be. If we plug in 1, 3, 3, we have 4 minus 9 is minus 5, right? And then we have 1 times 3 is 3, plus 3 is 6. Minus 5 times 6 is minus 30. So we should get minus 30 at the end. So let's try to figure out what happens. So if we multiply 1 and 3, we get 3. If we multiply 3 and 3, we get 9, right? So if we add 4 times 1 minus 9, we get minus 5. And if we add 3 and 3, we get 6. And if we multiply minus 5 and 6, we get minus 30. So this should be doable, right? So now let's think about calculating a gradient. And it would have been great if there had been any color. Well, I only have one color. Let's take this one. You have colored. Oh, well, wonderful. Thank you. I try not to break them. Okay, so let's see. Now let's try to figure out what the gradient is. Let's calculate the gradient at 1, 3, 3, actually. So what is the gradient at 1, 3, 3? I don't know whether I can do this. So we wrote that f of 1, 3, 3 is actually minus 30. Now let's calculate what the gradient f of 1, 3, 3 is. Let's plug it into that. So 8 times 3 is 24, right? Plus 4 times 3 is 12, is 36. Minus 27 is 9, right? So I guess this is 9. So let's do the second one. x1, x2, x3 is 9. Minus 2 times 9 is minus 18. Minus 9 is minus 27. Minus 4 times 1 is 3 is minus 23. And the last one is minus 1 times 9 is minus 9. Minus 18 is minus 27. And 4 times 1 is also minus 23. Okay, so this seems to be the gradient at 1, 3, 3. Minus, it's 9, minus 23 and minus 23. Now we try to calculate the gradient in this computational graph. Okay? So let's try to do that. So what the idea is, we take, what we calculate in every node is the gradient of that respective node with respect to all the input variables. Okay? So what is that node? That node is x1. What is the gradient of x1 with respect to x1, x2 and x3? Well, if x1 differentiated by x1 is 1, x2 differentiated by x1 is 0, and x1 differentiated by x3 is also 0. So here the gradient would be 1, 0, 0, right? And similarly here it would be 0, 1, 0, and here it would be 0, 0, 1, right? So this was simple. Now, let's calculate the gradient of that node. That node is this node multiplied by this node. So we know what the derivative looks like, right? So the derivative of a product looks like differentiate the first thing and multiply it with the second, plus differentiate the second thing and multiply it by the first. Right? So 3 times 1, 0, 0 is 3, 0, 0. Plus 1 times 0, 1, 0 is 3, 1, 0. So we get 3, 1, 0 here. The same can be done here. So we have 3 times 0, 1, 0, plus 3 times 0, 0, 1 is 0, 3, 3. Okay. Now, here we have to sum up two things. So it's a linear combination. We know that derivatives are linear. So this is 4 times this minus this. Because it's 4 times this minus this. So it's 4 times this, which is 4, 0, 0. So it's 4, 0, 0 minus this one, which is 4, minus 3, minus 3. And here, this is a sum. So we have to sum up these two derivatives, which is 3, 1, 0 plus 0, 0, 1 is 3, 1, 1. Okay, great. Now we have a product again and we know what the rule of products is. So differentiate this, multiply by that, plus differentiate by that, multiply by that. So let's write it out. This is therefore, the derivative is 4 minus 3 minus 3, multiplied by 6 minus 5 times 3, 1, 1. Okay. Let's calculate what the result is. 4 times 6 is 24, minus 15 is 9. Minus 18 minus 5 is minus 23. And minus 18 minus 5 is minus 23. So this looks like correct. So finally we figured out, we calculated the same thing two different ways. So it's the same. So it's likely true. Okay. So that means that whenever we have an expression, we can safely calculate the derivative, right? Now, the question is, how much work is this? How much work is this? Well, we have to pass through the whole graph. So if we have one function evaluation, we do have to do the same thing, but with n dimensional vectors. Which means that the work is instead of multiplying numbers, it's multiplying vectors of size n. Which means that the effort is approximately n times as much, right? So calculating the gradient like this means we have n times as much work as calculating a function value. Which is bad if we have a trillion parameters. Because that would mean that we have a trillion times more work to do than if we just evaluate a neural network, which would be unbelievably much. So we have to think about something else. And thinking about something else is we think again about this structure, which is also here because this is also a combination of simple operations. So what we know is that how we calculate the chain rule, right? The chain rule tells us that we calculate the partial derivative with respect to each entry value times the derivative of that respective inner function, right? So this is how the chain rule works. So it's summing up products, right? But summing up products means we can use the distributive law. So whether a times b plus c is the same as a times b plus a times c. So we can just first form the products and then do the sums. Okay, so the next idea that we use is something else. We do not calculate for every node here in the graph the gradient with respect to the input variables. We compute something else. We compute the partial derivative of the result because we only want to know the gradient of the result. The gradient of that node is just useless for us. So what we know is we want to have the gradient of the result. So what we actually do now is we calculate the partial derivative of the result with respect to all of the intermediate nodes. And if we do that, the partial derivative with respect to that node is the first component of the gradient, right? So what do we need for partial derivatives? For partial derivatives, for the chain rule to work, what we need to know is partial derivatives of all the nodes with respect to the input variables. Let's calculate them. So let's calculate the partial derivatives of the nodes with respect to the input variables. Now I choose one. Okay, so this is a product, right? So this is this node times this node is the result of that. So what is the partial derivative of that node with respect to that node? Well, that's the value of that node. That's something we used a lot of time by now. So the partial derivative of that with respect to that is the value of that, which is 6, right? So here it's minus 5. Okay, now let's see. This is a sum. So what is the partial derivative of that node with respect to that node? Well, it's 4 times this, so this partial derivative is 4. Because it's 4 times x1, if we differentiate by x1, it's 4. So it's minus 1 times this node, so the partial derivative here is minus 1. This is 1 and this is 1 because it's a sum. And up there we have a product again. So what is the partial derivative of that with respect to that? That's again that value, which is 3. And that value is 1, that value is 3, and that value is 3 again by the same rule. So now we've calculated all of the partial derivatives. And what we do now is we now use the chain rule the other way around. Okay? So let's start at the bottom. So what is the partial derivative of that node with respect to itself? Well, if you differentiate something by itself, the derivative is 1. So this is 1. Okay, now we use the chain rule. The chain rule means if we want to calculate the partial derivative of that with respect to that, is we have to multiply it by the partial derivative of that, which is minus 5. So we multiply the 1 by the minus 5, it's giving a minus 5 here. And we multiply the 1 by the 6, which is giving a 6 here. Okay, now let's go the other way. Let's go further. So the partial derivative of that with respect to that node is the product of this partial derivative and this partial derivative. But this product is something we've already calculated. So we have to multiply this by 1, which is giving a minus 5 here. Now further we go. Going to that node, this is the partial derivative of this is 6 times 4 is 24. But we also have to calculate this direction, which is the second partial derivative, which is minus 5 times 3, which is minus 15. And as we remember from the chain rule, we have to calculate partial derivative times the first derivative plus partial derivative times the second derivative. So minus 24 minus 15 is 9. Here we do the same. So we multiply minus 5 by 1 plus minus 6 by 3 is minus 5 minus 18 is minus 23. And here we do the same, which is minus 5 minus 18 is minus 23. So if we look at what we got in the end, we got the gradient, right? So how much work was that? Well, it was the same work as going forward through the graph because we have visited every node once. And we didn't have to do vector multiplications. We just multiplied numbers, right? So that means that once we've evaluated the stuff in forward mode, we can do it in backward mode again and then get the gradient for the same effort as the function value. So we've just killed a factor of n in our calculations, which is a lot if we have a trillion variables. So that actually, that trick makes training of neural networks feasible. If it wouldn't be that, we couldn't do it, right? But this trick that kills the factor of n in the dimension by when we actually calculate the derivative, that helps because that means that calculating the derivative of a neural network with respect to its parameters is approximately as much work as calculating the value of the neural network for a specific set of parameters. So that means that we can do some training, that we can do some gradient steps. And so the question is how does it look like for this specific kind of structure in network structure? So how can we calculate it for exactly that type? That means that we have to actually calculate all of these partial derivatives. And I don't know, I don't go into detail, into the full detail now because that would take too long. It's only four minutes left. I will clean that one because then I don't have to pull the... I don't know what coming out of that. I don't know what coming out of that. So what we are discussing here is called automatic or algorithmic differentiation. And what you saw is you actually never had to calculate the expression of the derivative, right? So you only used the rules, the differentiation rules of the single operations in order to calculate the derivative. So this is the so-called... So this is the so-called... The blue one is the so-called forward mode of algorithmic differentiation. And the red one is called the backward mode because it goes up the tree. So backward mode has a lot of advantages. And so at the end, what we would like to do is we would like to understand how these things work. And in order to do that, neural networks introduce new vectors. And these new vectors are the gradient with respect to zi of your loss function L. Of f theta and xi yi. So those are the delta i's. And what you actually have to do is you have to calculate the backwards propagation property. And so... I didn't write it down. Never mind. So it works like we multiply wi transposed by delta i. And multiply this component wise by sigma i prime of zi. So this is delta i minus one. So you go... The rest you go backwards. And so why do we have... And... So this is... These are the deltas that you actually compute in the backwards mode. And these wi's are the same matrices. So... And why are these wi's? So in reality, what you have is the gradient is something like the derivative transposed. That's something you learned, right? And so involving the gradient produces a transposing operation. So usually derivatives are... Rho vectors. Right? Because... Why are derivatives row vectors? Because derivatives are linear functionals. So they're linear functions. Linear functionals are row vectors. And in order to get the vector out of them, for the gradient you transpose it actually. And this is why here, you know, the derivative of an affine function is its matrix. Hmm? But now you have to do a transpose operation. This is why here, a transpose enters. Otherwise, you only have the derivative. And this is component wise multiplication. This is component wise. And the component wise multiplication is because you also add... Use the activation function component wise on all of these vectors. And this is why you have a component wise product. And this is just the chain rule. So you just take the chain rule layer by layer. So this is basically the idea that you have. And now the derivative of the loss function with respect to bi... That's just... Of f, sorry. F theta. This is just delta i. Which is the simple one. And the derivative with respect to wi... Of f theta. Is... Now let me think... This is something like... This involves a product. Um... Boo! I can't remember. I tell you... I tell you next Tuesday. I can't... I can't remember the formula. Um... Wait, let me see. Oh, I have it. No, I have it written somewhere. I can... I can likely tell you. I forgot to write it down. It's very... It's quite simple. It's also involving the w's. Um... Just a second. I forgot it. I got it. I got it. I got it. I got it. I got it. I should have a PDF somewhere. I don't have the PDF in there. Oh, anyway, I thought I had it as a PDF somewhere, but I haven't got it. Oh, yeah, I do. Have a LaTeX source, which is bad, but I can read LaTeX. So where is it? Activation functions, architecture classes. So usually I'm doing it in four lessons in the other course, and I condensed it down to be able to do it in two lessons, and I forgot to copy the part. And so I haven't got it somewhere. So there we are. Assumed component differentiable derivation. So there we have the deltas, frac, partial j, partial b, partial w. There we are. So that's what I said. Oh, yeah. That's it. Oh, it's very simple. Actually, it's delta i times a i minus one transpose. So that's it. That's the result. So great. Sorry for the delay. I forgot to write it down. So have a nice weekend and see you again next week on Tuesday to finish the cursory introduction to neural networks. So bye-bye. You
